[2025] 2 S.C.R. 526 : 2025 INSC 170
Ravi 
v. 
The State of Punjab
(Criminal Appeal No. 633 of 2025) 
10 February 2025
[Pankaj Mithal* and Ahsanuddin Amanullah, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the correctness of the order passed by 
the High Court convicting the appellant-husband for the murder 
of his wife.
Headnotes†
Evidence – Circumstantial evidence – Burden of proof – 
Prosecution case that brother of the deceased lodged FIR 
that his sister was murdered by her husband-appellant in 
connivance with his second wife, and that his other sister-
neighbour of the appellant, had seen the appellant committing 
the murder of the deceased by strangulating her with a rope 
and had threatened her not to disclose anything – Appellant 
also brought the dead body from his village to the native 
place of the brother of the deceased – Courts below convicted 
the appellant for murder of his first wife by strangulation – 
Correctness:
Held: Complainant, his sister, and cousin of the deceased declared 
hostile witnesses and prosecution left with the formal witnesses, 
doctor who conducted the post mortem and Inspector who carried 
out the investigation – Discarding the evidence of the witnesses 
who turned hostile, the evidence of the doctor and the Inspector do 
not conclusively establish the cause of the death – Circumstances 
do not conclusively establish the guilt of the appellant rather gives 
sufficient room to form a different opinion – On the basis of the 
circumstantial evidence, the innocence of the appellant cannot be 
completely ruled out – Courts below completely lost sight of the 
statement of the appellant recorded u/s.313 CrPC – Appellant in 
his statement categorically stated that the deceased had died a 
* Author
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
527
Ravi v. The State of Punjab
natural death as she was suffering from chronic tuberculosis – It 
was for the prosecution to have sought re-examination of the doctor 
conducting the post-mortem, however the prosecution completely 
failed to produce evidence to prove his guilt of the appellant 
beyond the shadow of doubt on the basis of the circumstantial 
evidence – Evidence on record gives ample leverage for two 
conflicting opinions, and in such circumstances, the benefit of 
doubt to be given in favour of the appellant – Impugned judgment 
set aside – Appellant in jail for over ten years, as such directed to 
be released – Penal Code, 1860 – Evidence Act, 1872 – s.106 – 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.313. [Paras 17, 19, 24-27]
Case Law Cited
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra (1984) 4 SCC 
116; Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State of Maharashtra (2006) 10 
SCC 681; Anees v. The State Govt. of NCT (2024) SCC OnLine 
SC 757 – referred to. 
List of Acts
Evidence Act, 1872; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal 
Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Murder; Circumstantial evidence; Burden of proof; Strangulation; 
Hostile witness; Formal witnesses.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
633 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.01.2019 of the High Court 
of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in CRAD No. 1650 of 2015
Appearances for Parties
Ms. Sonia Mathur, Sr. Adv., Ms. Surbhi Bhardwaj, Ms. Madhumitha 
Kesavan, Ms. Ronika Tater, T. Mahipal, Surya Kamal Mishra, 
Rishabh Thakur, Aditya Kaul, Advs. for the Appellant.
Ms. Bhakti Pasrija, D.A.G., Karan Sharma, Advs. for the Respondent.
528
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The appellant-accused Ravi has been convicted by both the courts 
below for the murder of his first wife Jamni by strangulation. Therefore, 
the present appeal.
3.	
The appellant was living in the village Madh, Amritsar by constructing 
a jhuggi in an open space, where he was working as a labourer. He 
used to live with his deceased wife Jamni, his second wife Soma 
and his two sons born from the first wedlock. They all had been 
living together as such for over 10-12 years.
4.	
The incident is of 22.08.2014. According to the case of the prosecution, 
Chaina Ram (PW-1), the brother of the deceased lodged a Zero FIR 
at Police Station Rajgarh, District Churu, Rajasthan on 22.08.2014 
stating that his sister Jamni with her husband i.e., appellant, was 
living at Rayya Mandi, Tehsil Baba Bakala, District Amritsar, Punjab. 
On the night of 22.08.2014 at about 11:00 pm, she was murdered by 
her husband in connivance with his second wife Soma. The husband 
of the deceased i.e., the appellant, brought the dead body from his 
village Rayya Mandi to village Gujjuwas in a truck. In the FIR, he also 
stated that his sister Rajo was residing in the neighbouring jhuggi of 
the appellant and she, herself, had seen the appellant committing 
the murder of the deceased by strangulating her with a rope and 
that he threatened her from disclosing anything about it to anyone.
5.	
The aforesaid FIR was transferred to the Police Station, Khilchian, 
Amritsar, Punjab and the dead body of the deceased was also taken 
there, where the memo of panchnama was executed and the post-
mortem was conducted.
6.	
The panchnama on record reveals that it was conducted at village 
Rayya Mandi, Police Station Rayya, Tehsil Baba Bakala, District 
Amritsar, Punjab, i.e., the place where the appellant was living in a 
jhuggi. The said panchnama, apart from other things, records the 
marks of injury on the body of the deceased and reports that there 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
529
Ravi v. The State of Punjab
were marks of ligature around the neck and the mouth was open 
with tongue protruding outward.
7.	
The post-mortem report states that in the opinion of the doctor, the 
deceased died of asphyxia caused by hanging and that there were 
ligature marks on the neck. 
8.	
The prosecution, to prove the appellant guilty of the aforesaid offence, 
examined seven witnesses which included the brother of the deceased 
Chaina Ram (PW-1), her sister Rajo (PW-2), her cousin Deep Chand 
(PW-3), the doctor who conducted the post-mortem Dr. Mohan Lal 
Meena (PW-5), retired DSP Bagla Ram (PW-6), Inspector Rachhpal 
Singh (PW-4) and Inspector Amolak Singh (PW-7).
9.	
The entire case of the prosecution is based on circumstantial evidence. 
Though, the sister of the deceased, i.e., Rajo (PW-2) is said to be 
an eye witness, she had not seen the commission of the crime. She 
was simply a resident of the neighbouring jhuggi and as such, may 
have had the first-hand information.
10.	 It is an admitted position that after the death of the deceased, the 
appellant, i.e., her husband carried her dead body on a truck to the 
native place of the brother of the deceased Chaina Ram (PW-1) 
and the sister of the deceased Rajo (PW-2) had accompanied him. 
Chaina Ram (PW-1), the brother of the deceased who had lodged 
the complaint in his testimony, accepted that her sister was married 
to the appellant and they were residing in Rayya Mandi. However, he 
was not aware of what actually happened on 22.08.2014 and stated 
that her sister died due to her illness. He categorically stated that 
the appellant was not responsible for her death. The said witness, 
as such, was declared hostile.
11.	 It may be pertinent to mention here that the aforesaid witness 
admitted his signatures on the Zero FIR (Exh. PW4/1) but went on 
to state that he had signed a blank paper and did not know what 
was written there. 
12.	 A pursual of the Zero FIR reveals that it is a computerized FIR and 
is not in the handwriting of the aforesaid witness. It only bears his 
signatures at the relevant place on both the pages of the Zero FIR. 
13.	 The sister of the deceased Rajo (PW-2) was also declared hostile 
as she stated that there was no dispute between her sister and 
her husband i.e. the appellant and that she died due to illness and 
530
breathing problems. Similarly, the cousin of the deceased Deep 
Chand (PW-3) was also declared hostile as he expressed ignorance 
as to what had actually happened on 22.08.2014.
14.	 In view of the aforesaid three witnesses turning hostile, the prosecution 
was left with the formal witnesses, namely, Dr. Mohan Lal Meena 
(PW-5) who conducted the post-mortem, the police officer/retired 
DSP Bagla Ram (PW-6) who registered the Zero FIR at Churu, 
Rajasthan, the SHO/retired Inspector Racchpal Singh (PW-4) who 
registered the formal FIR (Exh.PW4/2) and Inspector Amolak Singh 
(PW-7) who carried out the investigation. 
15.	 Dr. Mohan Lal Meena (PW-5), in his testimony, stated that he 
had conducted the post-mortem. The deceased had died due to 
asphyxia caused by hanging which is established by the ligature 
marks appearing on her neck. The death may have occurred two 
to five days prior to the post-mortem. In cross-examination, this 
witness accepted that, though the cause of death is asphyxia, it can 
be caused by chronic tuberculosis also and that the appearance 
of ligature marks on the neck might be due to the long journey of 
the dead body from one place to another. The above testimony of 
PW-5, thus, in no certain terms, establishes that the deceased died 
of asphyxia due to hanging or strangulation inasmuch as he had 
also opined that the death may be due to chronic tuberculosis. He 
had also explained the possibility of the ligature marks on the neck 
to be on account of the long journey and not solely due to hanging 
or strangulation.
16.	 The Inspector Amolak Singh (PW-7), who carried out the investigation, 
simply states that he had conducted the investigation and had 
arrested the appellant. On appellant’s disclosure, he discovered 
the rope which was used in the commission of the crime. However, 
in cross-examination, he admitted that similar ropes were easily 
available in the market. 
17.	 Now, if we discard the evidence of the witnesses who turned hostile, 
the crucial evidence with which we are left with is that of the doctor 
conducting the post-mortem (PW-5) and that of the inspector 
conducting the investigation (PW-7). The evidence of the aforesaid 
two, if read together, would only reveal that they have conducted the 
post-mortem and the investigation respectively. The doctor opined 
the cause of death to be asphyxia due to hanging with ligature marks 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
531
Ravi v. The State of Punjab
on the neck but in the cross-examination admitted that the ligature 
marks could be on account of the long journey of the dead body and 
that the cause of death of the deceased can also be due to chronic 
tuberculosis. Therefore, his evidence does not conclusively establish 
the cause of the death. Even the evidence of the Inspector (PW-7) 
does not establish beyond the shadow of doubt that the rope which 
was recovered by him was the same rope with which the crime may 
have been committed as similar ropes were easily available in the 
market. Nothing much turns upon his evidence as well. 
18.	 In a leading case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of 
Maharashtra1 this Court laid down the five golden principles, the 
panchsheels of circumstantial evidence, namely, (i) The circumstances 
from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully 
established; (ii) The facts so established should be consistent with 
the hypothesis of guilt and the accused, that is to say, they should 
not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the accused 
is guilty; (iii) The circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and 
tendency; (iv) They should exclude every possible hypothesis except 
the one to be proved; and (v) There must be a chain of evidence so 
complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion 
consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that in 
all human probability the act must have been done by the accused.
19.	 If we apply the above principles, the circumstances of this case, in 
no way, conclusively establish the guilt of the appellant rather it gives 
sufficient room to form a different opinion. On the basis of the above 
circumstantial evidence, the innocence of the appellant cannot be 
completely ruled out. 
20.	 Learned counsel for the State has placed reliance upon Trimukh 
Maroti Kirkan v. State of Maharashtra,2 wherein it has been held that 
in view of Section 106 of the Evidence Act, there is a corresponding 
burden on the inmates of the house to give a cogent explanation 
about the manner of the commission of the crime. Therefore, Learned 
counsel for the State argued that in view of Section 106 of the Evidence 
Act, it was for the appellant to have explained the circumstances 
under which the deceased died as the crime had occurred within 
1	
(1984) 4 SCC 116
2	
(2006) 10 SCC 681
532
the four corners of a house i.e. jhuggi and he alone had knowledge 
as to what had happened inside at the time of the crime.
21.	 The above argument may appear to be of some substance but if we 
look into the law deeply, we would find that the initial burden is upon 
the prosecution to first prima facie establish the guilt of the accused 
and then only the burden shifts upon the accused to explain the 
circumstances as contemplated by Section 106 of the Evidence Act. 
22.	 A three judge Bench of this Court in Anees v. The State Govt. of 
NCT3 has elaborately considered the principles of law governing the 
applicability of Section 106 of the Evidence Act and has held that 
the court should apply Section 106 of the Evidence Act in criminal 
cases with care and caution. The ordinary rule which applies to 
criminal trials and places the onus on the prosecution to prove the 
guilt of the accused, does not, in any way, stand modified by the 
provisions contained under Section 106 of the Evidence Act. The 
said provision cannot be invoked to make up the inability of the 
prosecution to produce the evidence of circumstances pointing to the 
guilt of the accused. The said provision cannot be used to support a 
conviction unless the prosecution has discharged the onus by proving 
all elements necessary to establish the offence. In other words, the 
prosecution does not stand absolved from its initial liability to prove 
the offence and it is only when such an onus is discharged and a 
prima facie case of guilt is made out that the provisions of Section 
106 of the Evidence Act may come into play.
23.	 It has further been emphasized in the above case that Section 106 of 
the Evidence Act would apply to cases where the prosecution could 
be said to have succeeded in proving facts from which a reasonable 
inference can be drawn regarding the guilt of the accused and not 
otherwise.
24.	 This apart, the courts below have completely lost sight of the statement 
of the appellant recorded under Section 313 of Code of Criminal 
Procedure4. The appellant in his statement under Section 313 CrPC, 
on being asked if he had anything further to say, categorically stated 
that the deceased had died a natural death as she was suffering 
3	
(2024) SCC OnLine SC 757
4	
In short ‘CrPC’
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
533
Ravi v. The State of Punjab
from chronic tuberculosis for which she was under treatment at 
Beas hospital. Once the appellant had disclosed about the aforesaid 
illness of the deceased and her treatment in a particular hospital, it 
was for the prosecution to have sought re-examination of the doctor 
conducting the post-mortem so as to ascertain as to whether the 
deceased was actually suffering from chronic tuberculosis, though 
he may have opined that the death may be due to asphyxia caused 
due to tuberculosis. The prosecution failed to do so or to produce 
any other independent evidence in this regard to dislodge the version 
of the appellant.
25.	 In view of the totality of the facts and circumstances of this case, 
we are of the opinion that the prosecution has completely failed to 
produce evidence to prove the guilt of the appellant beyond the 
shadow of doubt on the basis of the circumstantial evidence. Rather 
the evidence on record gives ample leverage for two conflicting 
opinions, and in such circumstances, the benefit of doubt has to be 
given in favour of the appellant. 
26.	 Accordingly, the impugned judgment and order dated 23.01.2019 
passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh 
is liable to be and hereby set aside and the appeal deserves to be 
allowed.
27.	 The appellant is not on bail as per the reports on record. He is in jail 
and as per the custody certificate, he has been in jail for six years 
and two months as on 05.01.2021, meaning thereby that he is in 
jail for over ten years as of today. Accordingly, he is directed to be 
released from custody immediately.
28.	 Before parting, we record our appreciation to the valuable assistance 
rendered by the legal aid counsel Ms. Sonia Mathur, Senior Advocate, 
who had appeared for the appellant and ably assisted by learned 
counsel, Ms. Surbhi Bhardwaj.
29.	 The appeal is allowed accordingly. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain