[2025] 5 S.C.R. 475 : 2025 INSC 476
Neha Enterprises 
v. 
Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
(Civil Appeal No. 6553 of 2016)
09 April 2025
[Pankaj Mithal and S.V.N Bhatti,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to disallowance of the input tax credit claimed by 
the dealer. Whether the assessing officer correctly held that the 
dealer is not entitled to input tax credit for the purchase tax paid 
by him on the sales turnover made in favour of the manufacturer-
exporter.
Headnotes†
Uttar Pradesh Value Added Tax Act, 2008 – s.7(c) and s.13(7)  – 
The appellant-dealer claimed an input tax credit amounting 
to Rs. 6,42,260/- – The assessing officer, at the first instance, 
allowed input tax to the extent of Rs. 6,42,260/- – Subsequently, 
the assessing officer vide order dated 22.02.2013 made u/s.28 
of the Act disallowed the claim of an input tax credit of 
Rs.6,42,260/- – Courts below concurrently denied the reliefs 
to the appellant herein – Correctness:
Held: The admitted circumstances are that the subject turnover 
of Rs. 1,89,35,100/- has been brought within the fold of section 
7(c) of the Act read with notifications dated 24.02.2010 and 
25.03.2010 – The consequence of such treatment is that the 
dealer was unable to sell the goods to the manufacturer-exporter 
without collecting the tax from the said manufacturer-exporter – 
For the said turnover, the dealer claims an input tax credit on 
the purchase tax paid by the dealer – Plainly interpreting and 
applying section 7(c) provides that no tax under the Act shall 
be levied and paid on the turnover of sale or purchase of such 
goods by such class of dealers as may be specified in the 
notification – The said exemption applies to the goods and also 
to the class of dealers who satisfy the conditions and fall within 
* Author
476
Supreme Court Reports
the notification issued under section 7(c) of the Act – Similarly, 
the scheme of availing input tax credit is determined by section 
13 of the Act – Section 13(1) provides for allowing credit of an 
amount as input tax credit to the extent provided by or under the 
relevant clause to which the applicable condition is attracted – If 
the purchased goods are resold in the course of exporting the 
goods out of India, then the full amount of input tax credit can be 
claimed – Section 13(7) outlines the circumstances under which 
such a benefit cannot be allowed – Section 13(7) also sets out 
that no facility for input tax credit shall be allowed to a dealer 
with respect to the purchase of any goods where the sale of 
such goods by the dealer is exempt from tax under Section 7(c) 
of the Act – The prohibition from allowing input tax credit is a 
statutory mandate, and the view taken by the orders impugned, 
in the facts and circumstances of this case, is available and 
correct. [Paras 9 and 10]
List of Acts
Uttar Pradesh Value Added Tax Act, 2008.
List of Keywords
Input tax credit; Input tax credit for the purchase tax; Section 7(c) 
of the Uttar Pradesh Value Added Tax Act, 2008; Section 13(7) of 
the Uttar Pradesh Value Added Tax Act, 2008; Statutory mandate; 
Collection of tax; Exepmtion from tax; Prohibition from allowing 
input tax credit; Levying of tax.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 6553 of 2016
From the Judgment and Order dated 24.11.2014 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in CTR No. 713 of 2013
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Udayan Jain, Ms. Kajal Sharma, Ranjan Mishra, Ms. Geetika Vyas, 
Harsh Jaiswal, Ms. Amiti Gupta, Sonal Jain.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Bhakti Vardhan Singh.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
477
Neha Enterprises v.  
Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
S.V.N. Bhatti, J.
1.	
The appellant is a registered dealer under the Uttar Pradesh Value 
Added Tax Act, 2008 (for short, ‘the Act’). The subject matter of 
the appeal relates to the turnover returns filed by the dealer for the 
assessment year 2010-11. The dealer recorded sales against the 
issuance of Form-E to the manufacturer-exporter, amounting to Rs. 
1,89,35,100/-. The dealer claimed an input tax credit amounting to 
Rs. 6,42,260/-. The assessing officer, at the first instance, allowed 
input tax to the extent of Rs. 6,42,260/-. Subsequently, the assessing 
officer vide order dated 22.02.2013 made under section 28 of the 
Act disallowed the claim of an input tax credit of Rs. 6,42,260/-. In 
the instant appeal, we are concerned with the disallowance of the 
input tax credit claimed by the dealer.
2.	
The assessing officer in the assessment order, passed under section 
28 of the Act, put the dealer on notice to hold that the dealer is not 
entitled to input tax credit for the purchase tax paid by him on the 
sales turnover made in favour of the manufacturer-exporter. The 
dealer explained that the case of input tax claimed by the dealer falls 
within the scope of section 13(1) of the Act. Even though the subject 
turnover falls within the ambit of section 7(c) of the Act, the proviso 
or exception covered by section 13(7) of the Act is not attracted. 
The assessing officer noted that the subject sales or the subject 
turnover made against Form-E was accepted by the department. 
The exemption from payment of tax shall not be levied and paid on 
the turnover of sales or purchase of such goods by such class of 
dealers as may be specified in the notification issued on this behalf. 
The notifications dated 24.02.2010 and 25.03.2010 covered the 
procedure for dealing with the turnover falling within section 7(c) of 
the Act. Therefore, the input tax benefit is provided in accordance 
with the scheme outlined in section 13 of the Act. Section 13(7) is 
a proviso, and the said proviso stipulates that a transaction covered 
by section 7(c) of the Act is not entitled to input tax credit. Extending 
input tax credit in terms of section 13(1) of the Act would be contrary 
to sections 7(c) and 13(1) on the one hand and 13(7) of the Act on 
the other.
478
Supreme Court Reports
3.	
The dealer filed an appeal before the additional commissioner, 
and the first appellate authority vide order dated 22.07.2013 
dismissed the appeal. The gist of the first appellate authority’s 
findings is that the notification dated 24.02.2010 corresponds to 
section 7(c) of the Act. The notification exempts the direct sale 
of raw materials and spare parts to manufacturer-exporters from 
tax upon filing Form-E. The notification does not provide input tax 
credit facility to sellers having tax-exempted sales made in favour 
of manufacturer-exporters. Section 13(7) constitutes an embargo, 
and once it is not disputed by the dealer that no tax turnover was 
recorded vis-à-vis the subject matter of the appeal, section 7(c) of 
the Act is attracted, and the consequential effect is that the dealer is 
not entitled to input tax credit. The order of the assessing authority 
was upheld in the second appeal filed by the dealer before the 
Tribunal of Commercial Tax, Meerut, Uttar Pradesh (“the Tribunal”), 
vide order dated 10.09.2013. The Tribunal, in the admitted facts 
and circumstances of the case, confirmed the view taken by the 
assessing officer and the first appellate authority. The Tribunal, in 
its fine reasoning, culminated in the conclusion that section 13(1)
(a) provides for which traders’ input tax credit shall be allowed. The 
appellant’s argument that input tax credit will not be allowed until 
section 13(1)(a) is amended is legally untenable, as it has been 
stipulated in section 13(7) that input tax credit will not be allowed 
in a few instances. Notifications no. 247 dated 24.02.2010 under 
section 7(c), circular dated 25.03.2010 issued by the commissioner 
of commercial tax and the order of the commissioner of commercial 
tax under section 59 dated 30.04.2010, are related to providing 
facilities to exporters. In these circulars, no facility has been given 
to the exporter-sellers. It is clear from section 13(7) that if any 
notification has been issued under section 7(c), then no facility 
of input tax credit will be allowed to the selling dealer. Hence, the 
law is against the appellant, and the action of the assessing officer 
regarding the reversal of input tax credit is justified. 
4.	
The dealer filed a revision before the High Court and, through an 
order dated 24.11.2014, the revision was dismissed. The operative 
portion of the order impugned reads thus: 
“Bare reading of the provisions of Section 13(7) clearly 
reveals that the applicant was ·not entitled for the input 
tax credit with respect to the sale of goods exempted 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
479
Neha Enterprises v.  
Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
under Section 7(c) of the Act. Tribunal has considered the 
facts of the case and held that in view of the provisions 
of Section 13(7) of the Act, the applicant was not entitled 
for input tax credit.
Under the facts and circumstances of the present case, 
the input tax credit was lawfully reversed by the Assessing 
Authority. I find no infirmity in the impugned order of the 
Tribunal. Question of law is answered in favour of the 
revenue and against the assessee.”
5.	
Hence, the Civil Appeal.
6.	
Mr. Udayan Jain, learned Counsel for the appellant, contends that 
the denial of input tax credit is prima facie illegal and unsustainable. 
The notification under section 7(c) of the Act read in the context 
of policy would show that the notification has been issued to 
encourage manufacturer-exporters in the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
The exemption from tax to the manufacturer-exporter, if, on the one 
side, promotes trade and commerce, denial of input tax credit to 
the seller/dealer, on the other hand, would be counterproductive to 
the very policy of the State Government. Section 13(7) should be 
read by appreciating its intent, and the input tax credit should not 
be denied by applying section 7(c) and the notifications issued. The 
argument, however, has been presented in a different perspective. 
The emphasis of the argument is to read section 7(c) in conjunction 
with section 13(1) and grant an input tax credit to the dealer. The 
turnover against Form-E filing has not been properly appreciated 
by all the authorities.
7.	
Mr. Bhakti Vardhan Singh, learned Counsel appearing for the 
respondent, contends that the case of the dealer falls under section 
7(c) read with the notifications dated 24.02.2010 and 25.03.2010. The 
dealer, by filing Form-E, recorded a turnover of Rs. 1,89,35,100/-. 
The dealer, therefore, is disentitled to input tax credit by operation 
of section 13(7). It is pointed out that input tax credit is available 
strictly as per the expression. In the interpretation of taxing statutes, 
intent does not form the guiding principle. There is no ambiguity 
in preferring an interpretation that is favourable to the dealer. The 
expression is clear, and the findings, both in law and fact, recorded 
by the courts below, do not warrant interference under Article 136 
of the Constitution of India. 
480
Supreme Court Reports
8.	
We have heard the learned Counsel and perused the record.
9.	
To avoid repetition, we have set out the gist of the reasoning and 
the conclusion of the authorities under the Act and the High Court. 
The admitted circumstances are that the subject turnover of Rs. 
1,89,35,100/- has been brought within the fold of section 7(c) of 
the Act read with notifications dated 24.02.2010 and 25.03.2010. 
The consequence of such treatment is that the dealer was unable 
to sell the goods to the manufacturer-exporter without collecting the 
tax from the said manufacturer-exporter. For the said turnover, the 
dealer claims an input tax credit on the purchase tax paid by the 
dealer. The entitlement is appreciated through the following schematic 
excerption and consideration of the sections, notifications and the 
exception in section 13(7):
“Section 7. Tax not to be levied on certain sales and 
purchases- No tax under this Act shall be levied and paid 
on the turnover of 
(a)	 xxx xxx xxx
(b)	 xxx xxx xxx
(c)	
such sail or purchase; or sale or purchase of such 
goods by such class of dealers, as may be specified 
in the notification issued by the State Government 
in this behalf”
“Section 13. Input tax credit- (1) Subject to provisions of 
this Act, dealers referred to in the following clauses and 
holding valid registration certificate under this Act, shall, in 
respect of taxable goods purchased from within the State 
and mentioned in such clauses, subject to conditions given 
therein and such other conditions and restrictions as may 
be prescribed, be allowed credit of an amount, as input tax 
credit, to the extent provided by or under the relevant clause.  
(d)	 Subject to conditions given in column (2), every dealer 
liable to pay tax, shall, in respect of all taxable goods 
except non-vat goods, capital goods and captive 
power plant, where such taxable goods are purchased 
on or after the date of commencement of this Act, be 
allowed credit of the amount, as input tax credit, to 
the extent provided in column (3) of the table below: 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
481
Neha Enterprises v.  
Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
TABLE
Sl. 
No.
Conditions
Extent of amount 
of input tax credit
(1)
(2)
(3)
1.
If purchased goods are re-sold-
(i)	
inside the State; or
(ii)	
in the course of inter-State 
trade or commerce; or
(iii)	
in the course of the export of 
the goods out of the territory 
of India.
Full amount of input 
tax
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
13(7) Except where-
(a)	 purchased goods; or
(b)	 manufactured goods which are manufactured by 
using purchased goods; or
(c)	
packed goods which are packed by using or 
consuming purchased goods.
are to be sold in the course of the export of the goods out 
of the territory of India, no credit of any amount of input 
tax shall be claimed by a dealer under sub-section (4) and 
no facility of input tax credit shall be allowed to a dealer 
in respect of purchase of any goods, where –
(i)	
sale of such goods by the dealer is exempt from 
payment of tax under clause (c) of section 7; or
(ii)	
such goods are to be used or consumed in 
manufacture or packing of any goods and sale of 
such manufactured or packed goods by the dealer 
is exempt from payment of tax either under clause 
(b) or clause (c) of section 7.
(iii)	 such goods are for transfer of right to use such goods.”
482
Supreme Court Reports
Notification dated 24.02.2010
“Manufacturer-exporter of any raw materials, processing 
materials consumable stores, spare parts, accessories, 
components, lubricants, fuel other than petrol and diesel 
and packing materials for use in the manufacture of goods 
by him or in the packing of goods manufactured by him - 
Turnover of direct sale to or direct purchase by - Exempt 
subject to conditions. 
K.A. NI.-2-247/XI-9(341)/09-U.P. Act-5-08-Order-(58)-2010
xxx
xxx
xxx
In the exercise of powers under clause (c) of section 7 of 
the Uttar Pradesh Value Added Tax Act, 2008 (U.P. Act 
No. 5 of 2008), the Governor is pleased to direct that no 
tax shall be payable under the said Act, with effect from 
April 01, 2010 on the turnover of direct sale to or direct 
purchase by manufacturer-exporter of any raw materials, 
processing materials, consumable stores, spare parts, 
accessories, components, lubricants, fuel other than petrol 
and diesel and packing materials for use in the manufacture 
of goods by him or in the packing of goods manufactured 
by him subject to the following conditions:”
xxx
xxx
xxx
Notification dated 25.03.2010
“OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER, COMMERCIAL 
TAX, UTTAR PRADESH 
LEGAL SECTION 
LUCKNOW: DATED 25.03.2010.
xxx
xxx
xxx
In the above notification there is provision of presenting 
declaration in prescribed form by the Commissioner in 
order to take benefit of the facility for which form ‘E’ is 
prescribed. By the letter of headquarter no. VAT/form-D 
maintenance procedure / 2007- 2008/511/Commercial Tax 
dated 14.01.2008 for the purchase of diesel oil, furnace 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
483
Neha Enterprises v.  
Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
oil etc. by the manufacturer form ‘D’ was  prescribed 
which was amended by letter no. 680/ dated 13-03-08. 
Similarly to form ‘D’, form ‘E’ is prescribed in pursuance 
of directions as referred in notification dated 24.02.2010 
for direct sale or purchase by the manufacturer / exporters 
of raw material, processing material, consumable stores, 
spare parts, accessories, components, lubricants, fuel 
other that petrol and diesel and packing materials for use 
in manufacture of goods by him or in the packing of goods 
manufactured by him. The maintenance and use this will 
be done as per the directions given in the letter dated 
13-03-09. Before the use of form ‘E’, the Tax Assessing 
Officer will counter sign on the original copy of form ‘E’ 
upon affixing EE series stamps.”
10.	 The argument of the dealer proceeds by falling on section 13(1) of 
the Act. The argument also attempts to give effect to the intention 
or policy of the State Government. Plainly interpreting and applying 
section 7(c) provides that no tax under the Act shall be levied and 
paid on the turnover of sale or purchase of such goods by such class 
of dealers as may be specified in the notification. The said exemption 
applies to the goods and also to the class of dealers who satisfy the 
conditions and fall within the notification issued under section 7(c) 
of the Act. The controversy is not over the exemption from levy and 
collection of tax between the dealer and the department, since the 
subject turnover falls admittedly under section 7(c) of the Act, read 
with notifications dated 24.02.2010 and 25.03.2010. The said admitted 
position takes us to the entitlement or eligibility of the dealer for the 
input tax credit. It is axiomatic, particularly in tax jurisprudence, that 
distinct concepts, such as taxable persons, taxable goods and taxable 
events, are established for levying and collecting the tax. Similarly, 
the scheme of availing input tax credit is determined by section 13 
of the Act. Section 13(1) provides for allowing credit of an amount as 
input tax credit to the extent provided by or under the relevant clause 
to which the applicable condition is attracted. If the purchased goods 
are resold in the course of exporting the goods out of India, then the 
full amount of input tax credit can be claimed. Section 13(7) outlines 
the circumstances under which such a benefit cannot be allowed. 
Section 13(7) also sets out that no facility for input tax credit shall 
be allowed to a dealer with respect to the purchase of any goods 
484
Supreme Court Reports
where the sale of such goods by the dealer is exempt from tax under 
Section 7(c) of the Act. The prohibition from allowing input tax credit 
is a statutory mandate, and the view taken by the orders impugned, 
in the facts and circumstances of this case, is available and correct. 
In the teeth of clear expression in section 13(7) of the Act, we find 
it difficult to give effect to the intent or policy made known through 
notifications to grant input tax credit. The dealer availing section 7(c) 
of the Act knows the extent to which the input tax credit could be 
claimed. Hence, the Civil Appeal fails, and is accordingly dismissed. 
There shall be no order as to costs. Pending applications, if any, 
shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan