[2025] 3 S.C.R. 1 : 2025 INSC 160
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. 
v. 
The State of Telangana & Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 609 of 2025)
07 February 2025
[B.V. Nagarathna and Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the criminal proceedings against the appellant(s) under 
Sections 498A, 506, Penal Code, 1860 and Sections 3 and 4, 
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961; Protection of Women from Domestic 
Violence Act, 2005 ought to be quashed.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.482 – Quashing – Penal 
Code, 1860 – ss.498A, 506 – Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 – 
ss.3, 4 – Complainant made specific allegations against her 
husband and her mother-in-law for demand of dowry and 
harassment – However, as regards the appellants (complainant’s 
mother-in-law’s younger sister and her son), the allegation was 
that they pressurized her to act according to her husband and 
her mother-in-law’s wishes – High Court declined to quash 
criminal proceedings against the appellants – Challenge to:
Held: Impugned judgements set aside – Charges against the 
accused including the appellants were sought to be substantiated 
based on the statements of the complainant, her parents and two 
panchayat elders – Complainant in her complaints did not assign 
any specific role to the appellants concerning cruelty, the demands 
of dowry or her physical and mental harassment except for making 
a sweeping allegation without specific details – Nothing on record 
to show that the parents or the two witnesses witnessed any of 
the incidents of physical harassment of the complainant at the 
instance of the appellants – Statements of the Panchayat elder is 
based on the information provided by the complainant’s father and 
is hearsay evidence – No prima facie case made out against the 
appellants for continuing the criminal proceedings against them 
in the trial – Pending criminal proceedings quashed qua the two 
appellants – Constitution of India – Article 142. [Paras 37, 23, 40]
* Author
2
Matrimonial/domestic disputes – Criminalisation of domestic 
disputes, effect on the institution of family – Tendency 
to implicate family members/relatives – Duty of Court, 
discussed – In criminal cases of domestic violence, complaints 
and charges to be specific. [Paras 31-35]
Case Law Cited
State of Haryana and Ors. v. Bhajan Lal and Ors. [1992] Supp. 
3 SCR 735 : (1992) 1 Supp. SCC 335; Anand Kumar Mohatta 
v. State (NCT of Delhi) [2018] 13 SCR 1028 : (2019) 11 SCC 
706 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal Code, 1860; Dowry 
Prohibition Act, 1961; Protection of Women from Domestic Violence 
Act, 2005.
List of Keywords
Quashing; Cruelty; Demand for dowry; Physical and mental 
Harassment; Domestic violence; Harassment; Criminal intimidation; 
Panchayat witnesses; Identical statements of the witnesses; 
Generalised allegations; Matrimonial/domestic disputes; Criminal 
cases relating to domestic violence; Tendency to implicate family 
members/relatives; Institution of family; Abuse of the process of 
the law; Charge-sheet; Hearsay evidence.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
609 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 04.04.2022 of the High Court 
for the State of Telangana at Hyderabad in CRLP No. 3105 of 2022
With
Criminal Appeal No. 610 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Nitin Tambwekar, Seshatalpa Sai Bandaru, Shaik Mohammad 
Haneef, Abdul Mannan, Irshad Ahmad, Advs. for the Appellants.
Ms. Devina Sehgal, Vineet George, Beno Bencigar, Parijat Kishore, 
Advs. for the Respondents.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
3
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. v. The State of Telangana & Ors.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, J.
1.	
Leave granted in both the SLPs.
2.	
This common order disposes of both the Criminal Appeals arising out 
of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 9556 of 2022 and Special 
Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 428 of 2024 as both these appeals 
relate to similar and connected incidents. 
3.	
Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 9556 of 2022 was filed against 
the judgement and order dated 04.04.2022 passed by the Ld. Single 
Bench of the High Court for the State of Telangana in Criminal Petition 
No. 3105 of 2022 whereunder the High Court declined to quash the 
criminal proceedings in C.C. No. 46 of 2022 under Section 498A, 
506 Indian Penal Code (for short “IPC”) and Sections 3 and 4 of the 
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (for short “Dowry Act”) pending before 
the Court of the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Bhongir under Section 
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short “CrPC”) by 
holding that, prima facie, there are certain allegations against both 
the appellants, Geddam Jhansi and Geddam Sathyakama Jabali, 
and that these are triable issues for which the appellants have to 
face trial and prove their innocence.
4.	
Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 428 of 2024 has been preferred 
against the judgement and order dated 03.02.2022 passed by the Ld. 
Single Bench of the High Court for the State of Telangana in Criminal 
Petition No. 1002 of 2022 whereunder the High Court declined to 
quash the criminal proceedings under the Protection of Women from 
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (for short “DV Act”) in DVC No. 25 of 
2021 pending before the Court of the Additional Judicial Magistrate, 
First Class, Bhongir under Section 482 of CrPC on similar ground by 
holding that, prima facie, there are specific allegations against the 
sole appellant, Geddam Jhansi, and the same have to be decided 
only after enquiry. 
5.	
Being aggrieved by the refusal of the High Court to quash the aforesaid 
criminal proceedings pending before the concerned Magistrates, the 
present appeals have been preferred.
4
6.	
The gravamen of the plea of the appellants in both the appeals is 
that the allegations against them are vague and are of a generalised 
nature without any specific overt act attributed to them, thus, incapable 
of being fastened with criminal liability, which unfortunately, the High 
Court had failed to appreciate.
7.	
The relevant facts in brief as may be culled from the pleadings is 
that a written complaint was filed before the Mahila Police Station 
Bhuvanagiri on 17.09.2021 by one Premlata (hereinafter referred to 
as “complainant”) in which it was mentioned that she was married 
to one Samuel Suresh, a doctor by profession and a resident of 
Chennai on 17.08.2016 and at the time of marriage her mother-in-law, 
Pathagadda, had demanded a sum of Rs.30 Lakhs and accordingly, 
the complainant’s mother had given Rs.10 Lakhs by way of cash and 
15 tolas of gold as dowry to her mother-in-law. It was stated that for 
about five months after the marriage, the complainant’s husband had 
treated her well and took care of her properly. Unfortunately, later, 
her husband suspecting her character started harassing her mentally 
and physically to get additional dowry of Rs.10 Lakhs, for which 
her mother-in-law, the younger sister of her mother-in-law, namely, 
Geddam Jhansi (Appellant No.1), her brother-in-law, Sudheer, and 
the son of Geddam Jhansi, namely, Geddam Sathyakama Jabali 
(Appellant No.2) pressurized her to act according to her husband’s 
and mother in law’s wishes and also threatened to kill her if the 
demand for dowry was not met. It was also alleged that because 
of their behaviour, the complainant’s mother organised panchayat 
several times before the elders and other family members. It was 
alleged that in front of the elders, her husband had agreed to take 
care of her properly but as usual after sometime he started harassing 
her because of which she ultimately approached the police for 
counselling but there was no change in their behaviour leaving her 
no alternative but to file the aforesaid complaint.
8.	
On the basis of the aforesaid complaint, FIR No. 54 of 2021 was 
registered at Bhongir Women PS, Rahakonda District, under Sections 
498A, 506 IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Act against the 
complainant’s husband, complainant’s mother-in-law, complainant’s 
brother in law and the present two appellants. On completion of the 
investigation, Charge Sheet No. 46 of 2021 was filed before the 
Court of the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Bhongir under Sections 
498A, 506 IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Act against the 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
5
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. v. The State of Telangana & Ors.
aforesaid accused including the present two appellants, which is now 
pending before the aforesaid court in C.C. No. 46 of 2022.
9.	
Apart from the aforesaid complaint filed before the Mahila Police 
Station, another complaint was filed by the complainant on 20.09.2021 
before the Protection Officer, Bhuvanagari alleging cruelty and criminal 
intimidation under the DV Act, 2005 making similar allegations with 
the additional allegations that on one occasion, her husband asked 
her not to touch his clothes and to go away from the kitchen and 
that he tried to burn his socks because the complainant had washed 
them. It was also alleged that her husband had influenced his friends 
to talk ill of her, who in turn used to call the complainant and ask 
her to leave her husband, further telling her that her husband has 
a girlfriend who had taken divorce to marry him. It was also alleged 
that on 17.10.2020 at around 10:00 p.m, the complainant was beaten 
and pushed out of the matrimonial house by her husband. 
10.	 The complainant accordingly, approached the Judicial Magistrate 
First Class, Bhongir where a case under DV Act, being DVC No. 25 
of 2021 was registered and is now pending.
11.	 At this stage it may be apposite to mention herein that the allegations 
are not one way and the husband had made counter allegations 
against the complainant. Before the aforesaid complaints were filed 
by the complainant, the husband of the complainant instituted a 
divorce proceeding before the Court of the Principal District Judge 
at Kanchipuram, which was registered as I.D.O.P. No. 44 of 2021 
under Section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 alleging neglect, 
insensitivity to the needs of the husband, incompatibility, concealment 
of facts, showing hostile attitude towards the husband, refusal to 
consummate the marriage, causing mental and physical harassment 
and desertion since 10 April 2018.
12.	 As we proceed to examine the issues involved, we may briefly 
allude to the law relating to quashing of FIRs/criminal proceedings, 
which is well-settled and summarised by this Court in the State of 
Haryana and Ors. vs. Bhajan Lal and Ors., 1992 Supp (1) SCC 
335 in which this Court held as below:
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various 
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of 
the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series 
6
of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary 
power under Article 226 or the inherent powers under 
Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and 
reproduced above, we give the following categories of 
cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be 
exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any 
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it 
may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined 
and sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or 
rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad 
kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first 
information report or the complaint, even if they 
are taken at their face value and accepted in 
their entirety do not prima facie constitute any 
offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information 
report and other materials, if any, accompanying 
the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, 
justifying an investigation by police officers 
under Section 156(1) of the Code except under 
an order of a Magistrate within the purview of 
Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made 
in the FIR or complaint and the evidence 
collected in support of the same do not disclose 
the commission of any offence and make out a 
case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not 
constitute a cognizable offence but constitute 
only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation 
is permitted by a police officer without an order 
of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 
155(2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR 
or complaint are so absurd and inherently 
improbable on the basis of which no prudent 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
7
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. v. The State of Telangana & Ors.
person can ever reach a just conclusion that 
there is sufficient ground for proceeding against 
the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar 
engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code 
or the concerned Act (under which a criminal 
proceeding is instituted) to the institution and 
continuance of the proceedings and/or where 
there is a specific provision in the Code or the 
concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for 
the grievance of the aggrieved party
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly 
attended with mala fide and/or where the 
proceeding is maliciously instituted with an 
ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the 
accused and with a view to spite him due to 
private and personal grudge.”
13.	 In the present case, the charge-sheet has been filed before the 
Court of the Magistrate in C.C. No. 46 of 2022 after investigation was 
completed by the police on the basis of the complaint/FIR lodged 
by the complainant and another proceeding is also pending under 
the DV Act before the Court of the Additional Judicial Magistrate. 
However, this will not preclude this Court from interfering with the 
criminal proceedings, if upon perusal of the complaints, the materials 
gathered during the investigation and in the charge-sheet, it is found 
that no prima facie case has been made out against the appellants 
and the criminal proceedings amount to abuse of the process of law. 
As mentioned above, the common plea of the appellants in both the 
proceedings is that allegations against them are of a generalized 
nature devoid of specific offending acts to constitute offences 
punishable under law.
14.	 In this regard, we may recall what this Court has held in Anand 
Kumar Mohatta v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2019) 11 SCC 706 as 
regards permissibility of quashing of proceeding once charge-sheet 
is filed as follows:
“14. First, we would like to deal with the submission of 
the learned Senior Counsel for Respondent 2 that once 
8
the charge-sheet is filed, petition for quashing of FIR is 
untenable. We do not see any merit in this submission, 
keeping in mind the position of this Court in Joseph 
Salvaraj A. v. State of Gujarat [Joseph Salvaraj A. v. 
State of Gujarat, (2011) 7 SCC 59 : (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 
23] . In Joseph Salvaraj A. [Joseph Salvaraj A. v. State of 
Gujarat, (2011) 7 SCC 59 : (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 23] , this 
Court while deciding the question whether the High Court 
could entertain the Section 482 petition for quashing of 
FIR, when the charge-sheet was filed by the police during 
the pendency of the Section 482 petition, observed : (SCC 
p. 63, para 16)
“16. Thus, from the general conspectus of the 
various sections under which the appellant is 
being charged and is to be prosecuted would 
show that the same are not made out even 
prima facie from the complainant’s FIR. Even 
if the charge-sheet had been filed, the learned 
Single Judge [Joesph Saivaraj A. v. State of 
Gujarat, 2007 SCC OnLine Guj 365] could have 
still examined whether the offences alleged to 
have been committed by the appellant were 
prima facie made out from the complainant’s 
FIR, charge-sheet, documents, etc. or not.”
15. Even otherwise also, it must be remembered that the 
provision invoked by the accused before the High Court 
is Section 482 of the CrPC and that this Court is hearing 
an appeal from an order under Section 482 of the CrPC. 
Section 482 of the CrPC reads as follows:
“482. Saving of inherent powers of the High 
Court.—Nothing in this Code shall be deemed 
to limit or affect the inherent powers of the High 
Court to make such orders as may be necessary 
to give effect to any order under this Code, or 
to prevent abuse of the process of any court or 
otherwise to secure the ends of justice.”
16. There is nothing in the words of this section which 
restricts the exercise of inherent powers by the Court to 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
9
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. v. The State of Telangana & Ors.
prevent the abuse of process of court or miscarriage of 
justice only up to the stage of the FIR. It is settled principle 
of law that the High Court can exercise jurisdiction under 
Section 482 of CrPC even when the discharge application 
is pending with the trial court [G. Sagar Suri v. State of 
U.P., (2000) 2 SCC 636, para 7, Umesh Kumar v. State 
of A.P., (2013) 10 SCC 591, para 20]. Indeed, it would 
be a travesty to hold that proceedings initiated against a 
person can be interfered with at the stage of FIR but not 
if it has advanced and the allegations have materialised 
into a charge-sheet. On the contrary it could be said that 
the abuse of process caused by the registration of the 
FIR stands aggravated if the FIR has taken the form of a 
charge-sheet after investigation. The power is undoubtedly 
conferred to prevent abuse of process of any court.
15.	 Keeping the aforesaid legal position in mind, we will examine whether 
the facts/materials obtaining in the present case would warrant 
interference of this Court under Section 482 of the CrPC for quashing 
the said criminal proceedings pending before the concerned courts.
16.	 As far as the first complaint is concerned, out of which the criminal 
proceeding in “C.C. No.46 of 2022” has arisen, which is pending 
before the Court of the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Bhongir, 
where the charge-sheet has been filed, the relevant portions of the 
said complaint read as follows: -
“xxxxxx
On 17.08.2016, I was married to Samuel Suresh. S/o. 
Late Janardhan Rao, aged 38 years, Caste: SC (Madiga). 
Occupation: Doctor, R/o Pondicherry in Chennai. At 
the time of marriage, my mother-in-law demanded Rs. 
30,00,000/- and accordingly my mother has given Rs. 
10.00.000/- by way of cash and 15 tulas gold as dowry 
to my mother-in-law. After the marriage for a period of 5 
months or so, my husband has taken care of me properly. 
Thereafter my husband started suspecting my character 
and harassed mentally and physically to get additional 
dowry of Rs.10,00,000/-. I submit that my mother-in-law 
Pathagadda Bharathi and younger sister of my Mother-in-
Law namely Geddam Jhansi, my brother-in-law Sudheer 
10
and son of younger sister of my Mother-in-law namely 
Geddam Satya Rama Jabili all the persons referred above 
used to pressurize to act according to my husband’s and 
Mother-in-law’s wish, otherwise they threatened to kill me. 
In this regard my mother organized Panchayathi several 
times, before the elders and family members. In front of 
the elders, my husband agreed to take care of me properly 
but as usual, after sometime, he started harassing me. 
Thereafter. I have approached Bhongiri Mahila Police 
Station and have given a complaint. Thereafter, Police 
personnel called them for counselling, but there was no 
change in the behaviour. In view of the above I request 
to take legal action, on all persons mentioned above.”
(emphasis added)
17.	 Charge-sheet is filed only on culmination of the investigation during 
which time the investigating agency collects all the relevant evidence 
in support of the complaint on the basis of which a clear prima facie 
case indicating commission of the offence must be made out against 
the accused warranting trial. The investigation may uncover/throw up 
more detailed and additional facts and evidence that would support 
the complaint/FIR. Accordingly, this Court will examine the charge-
sheet filed and examine the evidence which has been gathered in 
the present case relating to “C.C. No. 46 of 2022” to see if any new 
facts or evidence had been disclosed. 
18.	 In this regard we may refer to the charge-sheet filed in connection 
with the aforesaid case, relevant portions of which are reproduced 
hereinbelow: -
“As per the evidence collected, during the course of the 
investigation and as per detailed and discreet enquiries, 
prima-facie care is made out against the A-1 to A-5 for 
the offence punishable U/s 498-(A). 406, 506 IPC & Sec 
3 & 4 Dowry Prohibition Act-1961.
During the further course of the Investigation, since the 
prima-facie offence is proved against the accused A-1. A-2 
& A-4 on 23.09.2021 the LW-07 has Register post under 
sub-section (1) of Section 41 A of Criminal Procedure Code 
to them, but A-1, A-2 & A-4 was Rejected the Post, after that 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
11
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. v. The State of Telangana & Ors.
A-1 received anticipatory bail Hon’ble court of 5 additional 
district and sessions judge at Bhongir Cri.M.P.No.410/2021 
on 27-11-2021 A-3 & A-5 on 02.11.2021 the LW-07 has 
served the notices them under sub-section (1) of Section 
41.A of Criminal Procedure Code with directions to appear 
before me. Accordingly, on 03.12.2021, the accused A-3 
& A-5 have complied with the instructions of LW-07 by 
appearing before her. As such, as per the directions of 
the Hon’ble Apex Court and since the offence is having 
the punishment of less than seven years Imprisonment, 
the LW. 07 has served notices under sub-section (3) of 
section 41 A of Criminal Procedure to the accused A-3 & 
A-5 directing them to appear before the Hon’ble trial court 
as when they received the summons. 
Investigation done so far in this case it well established 
that LW-1 Panthagadda Premalatha is the complainant & 
victim legally wedded of the A-1 is resident of H No 1-11-
14. Near By Meg Market. Jangaon (V&M&D), Present at 
Yadagirigutta (V&M). Yadadri-Bhongir (Dist), the LW-2 S 
Potta Chandralah, the Lw-3. Smt Potta Bharathamma are 
parents respectively of victim and circumstant witness 
to the incident, the LW.4, Sri Eppialapally Narendar, the 
LW-5 Sri Bollepally Janardhan are panchayath elders & 
circumstantial witness to the incident. Whereas the accused 
A-1 Panthagadda Shymul Suresh is the son of A-2, the 
A-2. Panthagadda Bharathi, are resident of Thiruvikanagar. 
Madhaliya Pet. Pondicherry, the A-3 /Geddam Jhand. Small 
Mother-in-law of A-1, the A-4 Panthagadda Sudheer, the 
AS Geddam Sathyakama Jabal @Amancherla Jabali are 
Brothers of A-1 are resident of Jawaharagar, Hyderabad.
The LW-1 marriage was performed on 17.08.2016 with the 
A-1 as per customs prevailing in their community and the 
presence of their relatives. At the time of LW-1 marriage. 
her in-laws.
Demand Rs. 30,00,000/-Cash for dowry, in which, LW-2 
& 3 have gave Rs. 10,00,000/- cash, 15 Thule’s Gold to 
them as dowry, After marriage the couple had lead happy 
conjugal life of 5 Months. thereafter A-1 suspecting the 
12
Lw-1 character and also used to harassed mentally and 
physically to bring Additional Rs.10.00.000/- dowry from 
her parent’s house otherwise A-1 do the 2 marriage with 
other women, A-2 to A-5 are supported to A-1 Due to such 
harassment, the LWs 26 3 was placed the matter before 
the elders LW1-4 & 5 who are circumstantial witness & 
Panchayath elders. On request of the LWs 2 & 3, the elders 
held a panchayath 2018 May month 2 times at Chennai, 
2018 July month one time at Hyderabad A-3 House, 2019 
February Month one time. 2019 August Month one time 
convinced them, A-1 to A-5 says in front of panchayath 
elders take good care of Lw-1. but A-1 to A 5) are again 
harassed her. Later 2 years ago A1 to A-5 beaten the 
Lw-1 and necked out in the house to bring additional Rs. 
10,00,000/ dowry if not bring the amount they would kill 
the LW-1. Later Lw-1 filed a complaint against them in 
Woman PS Bhongir. Police are given counselling them, 
but A1 to A 5 did not change their · attitude. Thus the A1 
to A5 noted in Col. No 12 of this charge sheet committed 
an offence punishable U/s 498-A. 406, 506 IPC & Sec 3 
& 4 DP Act.”
19.	 Perusal of the charge-sheet would show that the investigating agency 
had relied on the statements of the complainant, her parents and 
two other witnesses who are Panchayat elders to substantiate the 
allegations. As far as the statement of the complainant is concerned, 
it is in the form of the complaint which has been already reproduced 
hereinabove. We will now examine whether any new or fresh 
evidence has been revealed in the course of the investigation from 
the examination of other witnesses, namely, the complainant’s parents 
and the two panchayat witnesses. 
20.	 The statements of the parents are carbon copy of each other and 
as such we may refer to the statement of the father only, relevant 
portions of which read as follows: -
“I am resident of Yadadri Bhuvangiri district, Bibinagar, 
Brahmanapalli road. We married our daughter Premalatha 
in 2016 to Panthagadda SamuelSuresh, s/o Janardhan 
Rao, resident of Pondicherry. Our son-in-law works as a 
Doctor. At the time of marriage, the Mother-in-law of my 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
13
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. v. The State of Telangana & Ors.
daughter demanded Rs.30,00,000 cash as dowry and we 
gave Rs. 10,00,000/ cash and 15 sovereigns of gold as 
per her wish. Five months after marriage, my daughter 
came to our house and told me: that her husband-was 
suspecting her with every person she spoke further he told 
her that he doesn’t like her as she did not get the dowry as 
demanded by them and asked her to get additional dowry 
of Rs. 10,00,000/ for his needs or else asked her to leave 
him so that, he can marry again. He was harassing my 
daughter mentally and physically. My daughter’s Mother-
in-law Bharathi, my daughter’s mother-in-law’s younger 
sister Geddam Jhansi and her son Geddam Sathyacama, 
my daughter’s husband’s brother Sudhir, Jabali, all of them 
supported my daughter’s husband and told that as she 
brought less dowry they warned her to listen to her husband 
or else they will kill her. They used to say insulting words 
and used to abuse her and beat her. In this regard we 
held panchayat with elders. When the elders convinced 
them, they used to say they will look after her well and 
taken her with them, but used to harass her again. These 
type of panchayats took place 4 times in Chennai and 5 
times in Hyderabad. Approximately about 2 years ago my 
daughter came to our house and told me that when she 
questioned why they were doing like this, they said, how 
dare you to raise your voice against us and all of them 
together abused her and beat her and pushed her out 
of house. They threatened her saying that, if she comes 
home without getting money of Rs.10,00,000/- they will kill 
her. After that, my daughter has given a complaint against 
them in Bhuvanagiri Mahila Police Station and the police 
called them and counselled them, but there was no change 
in them is what he stated.”
(emphasis added)
21.	 The other evidence is in the form of the statements of the two 
panchayat witnesses, namely, Sri Eppala Pally Narendar and Sri 
Bollepally Janardhan. It is also noticed that their statements too 
are reproduction of the other and as such examination of only 
one of the statements will suffice, for which we may examine the 
14
statement of Sri Eppala Pally Narendar, relevant portions of which 
read as follows: -
“I am a resident of Yadadri-Bhuvanagiri district…….After 
5 months of their marriage Chandraiah came to me and 
told me that his daughter came home and told him that her 
husband is suspecting her with every person she spoke 
Further he told he doesn’t like her, as she did not get the 
dowry that they asked for he asked her to get additional 
dowry of Rs 10,00,000 for his needs or else asked her 
to leave him so that he can marry again. He used to 
harass mentally and physically. Premalatha’s Mother-in-
law Bharathi, her Mother-in-law’s younger sister Geddam 
Jhansi and her son Geddam Sathyacama, Jabali, her 
husband’s brother Subir, all of them together supported 
her husband and told her that she brought less dowry 
and warned her to listen to her husband or else they will 
kill her. They used to say insulting words and used abuse 
her and beat her Premalatha’s father told me that in this 
regard, they were holding a panchayat with elders and 
asked me to come an panchayat elder. Then I along with 
a few other elders went to the panchayat. We told them 
to be good and they said we will look after Premalatha 
well and has taken her with them, but again harassed 
her in the same way. In May 2018, one time in July 2018, 
one time in February 2019, one time in 2019 August, in 
panchayats were held in Chennai and Hyderabad (Jhansi’s 
house). In the panchayat all the above persons, collectively 
told that, if they give the dowry they asked for only, they 
will take Premalatha or else we will get their boy married 
again. 1 came to know that at about 2 years ago all of 
them together abused and beat Premalatha and pushed 
her out of house and threatened her to get Rs.5,00,000 
and then only they will allow her enter the house or else 
they will kill her-is the statement given by him”
22.	 When we minutely examine the statements of the father and the 
mother of the complainant, what can be seen is that as far as the 
demand for dowry of Rs. 30 Lakhs and giving of Rs. 10 lakhs and 
15 sovereigns of gold at the time of marriage of the complainant is 
concerned, it can be said that it was within their direct knowledge. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
15
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. v. The State of Telangana & Ors.
Being the father and mother, the complainant daughter would 
naturally convey to them what had transpired with her in relation 
to her husband and family. Thus, as regards other allegations of 
harassment, the same were informed to them by their daughter but 
they were not witness to the same. 
It may also be noted that as regards the alleged act of beating of 
the complainant by her husband and other relatives mentioned by 
the parents, the complainant herself does not mention so in her 
complaints. Therefore, this allegation of beating of the complainant 
is something which has been added by the father and the mother of 
the complainant though they did not themselves witness the same.
23.	 As regards the statement of Sri Eppala Pally Narender, the Panchayat 
elder, regarding the incidents of harassment which are the subject 
matter of the complaint, the same has been stated by him after he 
was informed by the father of the complainant. Thus, his evidence 
is nothing but hearsay evidence. As far as the statement regarding 
holding of panchayat at Hyderabad and Chennai is concerned, where 
the family members of the husband had allegedly stated that if the 
dowry is not given as demanded, the complainant would not be 
taken back and they would get the husband married again, the said 
statement is of a very generalised nature and vague in the sense 
that it does not mention exactly when and in which Panchayat the 
aforesaid incident took place and what roles the appellants played. 
Further, it is noticed that this witness as well as the other Panchayat 
witness are residents of Bhongir which is in Telangana. It is not 
stated how they were also present in the Panchayat meetings held 
in Chennai.
The aforesaid Panchayat witness mentioned about the alleged 
demand of dowry and threat meted out to the complainant of being 
killed if the demand for dowry of Rs. 5 lakhs was not met, and about 
the threat of the complainant being thrown out of the matrimonial 
house, but the said statement is based on the information provided 
to him by the father of the complainant and is not based on personal 
knowledge of the witness.
24.	 When the aforesaid statements are examined, it is evident that there 
certainly are specific allegations made against the husband of the 
complainant, his mother (mother-in-law of the complainant) about 
demand of dowry and harassment meted out to the complainant. 
16
However, as regards the present appellants, the allegation against 
them is that they along with the other accused family members used 
to pressurize the complainant to act according to her husband and 
her mother-in-law’s wishes. Apart from this generalised allegation, 
there are no specific or overt acts attributed to the appellants which 
would tantamount to acts of cruelty or physical or mental harassment 
or being active participants in the demands for dowry.
25.	 From the above what is clearly evident is that the statements of the 
witnesses though support the case of the complainant, do not disclose 
any new fact or provide better particulars beyond what had already 
been stated by the complainant. As far as the present appellants are 
concerned, these witnesses including the complainant merely make 
generalised allegations without any specific evidence against them. 
26.	 Thus, if the evidence of the complainant as well as the witnesses 
are taken at their face value, what can be said to have been made 
out against the appellants is that the appellants and other members 
of the family used to pressurize the complainant to act according 
to the wishes of her husband and mother-in-law which is a very 
generalised allegation devoid of specific particulars.
27.	 As mentioned above, the statements of the mother and the father of 
the complainant as annexed in the charge-sheet are carbon copies. 
Similarly, the same is in respect of the statements of the other 
two independent witnesses, Epalla Pally Narender and Bollepally 
Janardhan. Under these circumstances, discussed above, we have 
no hesitation to say that the identical statements of the witnesses do 
not inspire confidence of this Court for continuation of the criminal 
proceedings with regard to the present appellants.
28.	 Coming to the other case relating to domestic violence pending before 
the Court of Additional Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Bhongir in 
DVC No. 25 of 2021, the same is based on the second complaint 
dated 20.09.2021 filed by the complainant, relevant portions of which 
read as follows:-
“xxxxxx
On 17.08.2016, I was married to Samuel Suresh….
After the, marriage for a period of 5 months or so, my 
husband has taken care of me properly. Thereafter 1. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
17
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. v. The State of Telangana & Ors.
My husband Samuel Suresh, 2. My mother-in-law Bharati 
Janardhan. 3. Younger sister of my mother-in law Jhansi 
Geddam 4. My brother-in-law Pathagadda Sudheer 5. 
Son of my mother-in-law’s sister Geddam Sathyakama 
Jabill, all the above referred persons, with a plan, started 
harassing me physically and mentally and demanded to 
get additional dowry of Rs. 10,00,000/-. When I informed 
the same thing to my parents, my parents organized a 
panchayat before my family members and elders. My 
husband agreed to take care of me properly, before the 
elders, but as usual after some days he started harassing 
me along with his family members. They made me to pay 
the house rent. At times my husband stayed away from 
the house during nights. My husband used to tell each and 
everything to my mother-in-law and he used to act as per 
her directions. Further my mother-in-law used to pressurize 
me to purchase a new house and a car. They also tried 
to get a false report from the psychiatrist, by taking an 
appointment with the doctor. Thereafter they forced me to 
address a letter stating that, I was responsible for all the 
mistakes happened in our marital life. They have taken 
money from me and have spent for their personal uses.
I submit that when meeting was held at the residence of 
younger sister of my mother-in-law, my husband promised 
before my parents that he will take care of me properly. 
After that when I holded his hand, he pushed me down and 
used to scold me for every small issue. Further he asked 
not to touch his clothes and go away from the kitchen. 
Once he tried to burn his socks. because I washed them. 
My husband has not supported me, even when requested 
him, that there is a problem in my job and finally lost the 
job. My parents have invited my husband for my brother’s 
marriage, but he refused to attend the marriage and used to 
pressurize me to sign the letter. He used to tell bad about 
me to his friends and they used to call me and asked me 
to leave my husband. One day, a girl called me and said 
that my husband is having a girlfriend earlier and now she 
has taken divorce from her husband and therefore he is 
planning to marry her. They have tortured me in many 
18
ways, but I patiently tolerated their ill-treatment for a smooth 
marriage, but he has not understood me. He tortured me 
mentally by scolding me and he used to go out with his 
friends and used to come at 3 or 4 in the early morning. 
On 17.10.20 at around 10:00 pm he necked me out of 
the house, therefore I request you to take legal action on 
my husband Samuel Suresh and other family members 
for torturing me physically and mentally. Further I request 
you to take action as per Domestic Violence and see that 
protection order and residence order is provided in my 
favor. Further, see that every month Rs.30,000/- is given 
to me, for my maintenance.”
(emphasis added)
The said second complaint is more or less the reiteration of the 
allegations made in her first complaint with some additional incidents. 
Perusal of the second complaint shows that no specific allegations 
about harassment have been made against the appellants.
29.	 As far as the allegation of the complainant of being thrown out of 
her matrimonial house on 17.10.2020 is concerned, she made the 
specific allegation only against her husband and she did not attribute 
any role of the appellants except for making a general allegation of 
harassing her physically and mentally without specifying the actual 
role of the appellants.
30.	 It may be also noted that in the second complaint, the complainant 
had specifically stated that when a meeting was held at the residence 
of the younger sister of her mother-in-law (Appellant No.1), her 
husband promised before her parents that he would take care of her 
properly. This statement shows that the Appellant No. 1 was trying 
to mediate and broker peace between the complainant, her husband 
and her mother-in-law, which is inconsistent with the allegation that 
the appellants were pressurising the complainant in support of the 
mother-in-law and the husband.
31.	 Invoking criminal process is a serious matter with penal consequences 
involving coercive measures, which can be permitted only when 
specific act(s) which constitute offences punishable under the penal 
code or any other penal statute are alleged or attributed to the accused 
and a prima facie case is made out. It applies with equal force 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
19
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. v. The State of Telangana & Ors.
when criminal laws are invoked in domestic disputes. Criminalising 
domestic disputes without specific allegations and credible materials 
to support the same may have disastrous consequences for the 
institution of family, which is built on the premise of love, affection, 
cordiality and mutual trust. Institution of family constitutes the core 
of human society. Domestic relationships, such as those between 
family members, are guided by deeply ingrained social values and 
cultural expectations. These relationships are often viewed as sacred, 
demanding a higher level of respect, commitment, and emotional 
investment compared to other social or professional associations. 
For the aforesaid reason, preservation of family relationship has 
always been emphasised upon. Thus, when family relationships 
are sought to be brought within the ambit of criminal proceedings 
rupturing the family bond, courts should be circumspect and judicious, 
and should allow invocation of criminal process only when there are 
specific allegations with supporting materials which clearly constitute 
criminal offences.
32.	 We have to keep in mind that in the context of matrimonial disputes, 
emotions run high, and as such in the complaints filed alleging 
harassment or domestic violence, there may be a tendency to 
implicate other members of the family who do not come to the 
rescue of the complainant or remain mute spectators to any alleged 
incident of harassment, which in our view cannot by itself constitute 
a criminal act without there being specific acts attributed to them. 
Further, when tempers run high and relationships turn bitter, there 
is also a propensity to exaggerate the allegations, which does not 
necessarily mean that such domestic disputes should be given the 
colour of criminality.
33.	 It goes without saying that genuine cases of cruelty and violence 
in domestic sphere, which do happen, ought to be handled with 
utmost sensitivity. Domestic violence typically happens within the 
four walls of the house and not in the public gaze. Therefore, such 
violence is not noticed by public at large, except perhaps by the 
immediate neighbours. Thus, providing visible evidence by the 
victim of domestic violence may not be easily forthcoming and 
producing direct evidence may be hard and arduous, which does 
not necessarily mean that domestic violence does not occur. In 
fact, to deal with this pernicious phenomenon, stringent statutes like 
Protection from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, have been enacted 
20
with very expansive meaning and scope of what amounts to domestic 
violence. Since, violence perpetrated within the domestic sphere by 
close relatives is now criminalised entailing serious consequences 
on the perpetrators, the courts have to be careful while dealing with 
such cases by examining whether there are specific allegations with 
instances against the perpetrators and not generalised allegations. 
The purpose and mandate of the law to protect the victims of domestic 
violence is of paramount importance, and as such, a balance has to 
be struck by ensuring that while perpetrators are brought to book, 
all the family members or relatives are not indiscriminately brought 
within the criminal net in a sweeping manner.
34.	 For a matrimonial relationship which is founded on the basis of 
cordiality and trust to turn sour to an extent to make a partner to hurl 
allegations of domestic violence and harassment against the other 
partner, would normally not happen at the spur of the moment and 
such acrimonious relationship would develop only in course of time. 
Accordingly, such a situation would be the culmination of a series of 
acts which turns, otherwise an amicable relationship, into a fractured 
one. Thus, in such cases involving allegations of domestic violence 
or harassment, there would normally be a series of offending acts, 
which would be required to be spelt out by the complainant against 
the perpetrators in specific terms to rope such perpetrators in the 
criminal proceedings sought to be initiated against them. Thus, mere 
general allegation of harassment without pointing out the specifics 
against such perpetrators would not suffice, as is the case in respect 
of the present appellants.
35.	 We are, thus, of the view that in criminal cases relating to domestic 
violence, the complaints and charges should be specific, as far as 
possible, as against each and every member of the family who 
are accused of such offences and sought to be prosecuted, as 
otherwise, it may amount to misuse of the stringent criminal process 
by indiscriminately dragging all the members of the family. There 
may be situations where some of the family members or relatives 
may turn a blind eye to the violence or harassment perpetrated 
to the victim, and may not extend any helping hand to the victim, 
which does not necessarily mean that they are also perpetrators of 
domestic violence, unless the circumstances clearly indicate their 
involvement and instigation. Hence, implicating all such relatives 
without making specific allegations and attributing offending acts to 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
21
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. v. The State of Telangana & Ors.
them and proceeding against them without prima facie evidence that 
they were complicit and had actively collaborated with the perpetrators 
of domestic violence, would amount to abuse of the process of law. 
36.	 Our observations, however, should not be generalised to mean 
that relatives cannot be brought under the purview of the aforesaid 
penal provisions when they have actively participated in inflicting 
cruelty on the daughter-in-law/victim. What needs to be assessed 
is whether such allegations are genuine with specific criminal role 
assigned to such members of the family or whether it is merely a 
spill over and side-effect of a matrimonial discord and allegations 
made by an emotionally disturbed person. Each and every case of 
domestic violence will thus depend on the peculiar facts obtaining 
in each case.
37.	 In the present case, the charges against the accused including the 
appellants are sought to be substantiated based on the statements 
of the complainant, her parents and two panchayat elders. 
As discussed above, the statements of the two elders are based on 
the information provided by the father of the complainant. These two 
witnesses did not witness any of the incidents of physical harassment 
by the appellants. Though they were present in the panchayat to 
resolve the dispute between the parties, their account of harassment 
of the complainant is based on what they had learnt from the father of 
the complainant. As regards their knowledge of demand of dowry by 
the appellants, the same is quite vague and without specific details.
Similarly, the statements of the parents of the complainant are based 
on the information provided by the complainant/daughter. There is 
also nothing on record to show that the parents witnessed any of the 
incidents of physical harassment of the complainant at the instance 
of the appellants.
Thus, the evidence against the appellants in these proceedings boils 
down to the evidence of the complainant. The complainant in her 
complaints as mentioned above, did not assign any specific role 
to the appellants concerning the demands of dowry and physical 
and mental harassment of the complainant, except for making a 
sweeping allegation without specific details. The evidence of the 
complainant is the foundation for the criminal proceedings against 
the appellants. As discussed above, the evidence of the other 
22
witnesses do not disclose anything new as far as the appellants 
are concerned. 
In our considered view, the aforesaid materials do not constitute a 
prima facie case against the appellants for continuing the criminal 
proceedings against them in the trial.
38.	 We have also noted that the appellants do not live with the principal 
accused. While the marriage took place in Pondicherry and the 
complainant lived with her husband and mother-in-law in Chennai, 
the appellants are residents of Hyderabad. As the appellants do not 
stay together with the complainant and her husband and mother-
in-law, to make the appellants as co-accused for alleged offences 
committed in the matrimonial house of the complainant on the basis 
of very generalised allegations does not appear to be tenable.
39.	 Under these circumstances, for the reasons discussed above, we 
are satisfied that the appellants have been able to make out a case 
for interference in these proceedings qua the present appellants 
as in our opinion no prima facie case has been made out against 
the appellants to continue with the criminal proceedings against 
them and allowing these to continue would amount to abuse of the 
process of the law.
40.	 Accordingly, we allow both the present Criminal Appeals as below:
(i)	
The impugned judgement and order dated 04.04.2022 passed 
by the Ld. Single Bench of the High Court for the State of 
Telangana in Criminal Petition No. 3105 of 2022 is set aside 
and the criminal proceedings in “C.C. No. 46 of 2022” pending 
before the Court of the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Bhongir 
under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is 
quashed qua the two appellants, Geddam Jhansi and Geddam 
Sathyakama Jabali.
(ii)	
The impugned judgement and order dated 03.02.2022 passed 
by the Ld. Single Bench of the High Court for the State of 
Telangana in Criminal Petition No. 1002 of 2022 is set aside 
and the criminal proceedings in DVC No. 25 of 2021 pending 
before the Court of the Additional Judicial Magistrate, First Class, 
Bhongir is quashed qua the appellant, Geddam Jhansi. This 
is having regard to the criminal proceeding against her being 
quashed as above and as identical allegation (paragraph 28 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
23
Geddam Jhansi & Anr. v. The State of Telangana & Ors.
above) are made against her in DVC No. 25 of 2021, and in 
exercise of our powers under Article 142 of the Constitution of 
India. This is also by bearing in mind the relationship of the 
appellant Geddam Jhansi to the complainant, being the latters’s 
mother-in-law’s sister.
41.	 However, it is made clear that the observations and findings recorded 
herein by this Court are in the respect of the allegations made against 
the present appellants and the same will have no bearing on the 
criminal proceedings against the other accused persons and the trial 
courts will not be swayed by the observations and findings recorded 
herein by this Court and the trial courts are expected to proceed with 
the criminal proceedings pending against the other accused persons 
after proper appreciation of evidence and in accordance with law.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey