[2025] 2 S.C.R. 1091 : 2025 INSC 243
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. 
v. 
Central Bank of India & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 1565 of 2025)
4 February 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala* and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether ‘equitable mortgages’ are recognized in India under the 
nomenclature of ‘charge’ in terms of Section 100 of the Transfer 
of Property Act, 1882 (TPA); Who holds a valid mortgage over the 
property—the Appellant (Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd.) or the 
Respondent No.1 (Central Bank of India).
Headnotes†
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 – Sections 58, 100 – Equitable 
mortgage – Equitable mortgages are recognized in India as 
a ‘charge’ under Section 100 of the TPA – Charge created by 
equitable mortgage will be enforceable against third parties as 
far as possible in terms of the procedure applicable to a simple 
mortgage, except against bona fide transferees without notice – 
Equitable mortgages can be enforced in equity but remain a 
right in personam, not in rem, unless properly registered:
Held: Equitable mortgages are recognized in India as a ‘charge’ 
under Section 100 of TPA – Concept of equitable mortgage is a 
creation of the doctrine of equity, and its absence from the Act, 1882 
does not negate its validity, as it serves to uphold the principles of 
fair-play, good conscience, and justice – Enforceable against the 
mortgagor but not against bona fide transferees without notice – 
If a transaction does not amount to a mortgage but constitutes a 
preliminary step towards mortgage creation, three recourses are 
available to the lender (1) Claim that the transaction amounts to 
an equitable mortgage as it was intended to create present or 
immediate security; (2) Claim that part-performance of the contract 
has occurred, justifying relief to perfect the mortgage by executing 
further documentation; (3) Bring a suit for recovery of money, relying 
on the initial intention of the parties to create security – Appeal 
allowed, High Court order set aside. [Paras 56-61]
* Author
1092
Supreme Court Reports
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 – Sections 58, 100 – Valid 
mortgage – Priority of charge – the Appellant had the first 
valid charge over the mortgaged property as it held the share 
certificate of ownership – High Court and DRAT erred in holding 
that the Respondent No. 1 held the first charge:
Held: The first valid charge over the mortgaged property is with the 
Appellant (Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd.), not the Respondent 
(Central Bank of India) – When the original borrowers deposited 
with the appellant bank, the share certificate of ownership to the 
said Flat, on that very day and date, a legal charge is said to have 
been created on the flat in favour of the appellant bank, whereas, 
when it comes to the respondent no. 1 bank no such charge on the 
flat was created, rather what was created was only an equitable 
mortgage, though prior in time – This distinction is particularly 
important, because even if the agreements to sale deposited with 
the respondent no. 1 bank were registered and thereby, giving 
public notice of their existence, still the appellant bank by virtue 
of possession of the actual title deeds to the said Flat in the form 
of the share certificate of ownership would be accorded priority in 
charge for the sole reason that the charge created by it is a legal 
mortgage in terms of Section 58 of the Act, 1882 – Appeal allowed, 
High Court order set aside. [Paras 47, 52, 67, 68]
Case Law Cited
Kedar Lal v. Hari Lal [1952] SCR  179 : AIR 1952 SC 47; K.J. 
Nathan v. S.V. Maruthi Rao [1964] 6 SCR 727; Suraj Lamp & 
Industries (P) Ltd. (2) through Director v. State of Haryana & Anr. 
[2011] 11 SCR 848 : (2012) 1 SCC 656; Bank of India v. Abhay D. 
Narottam & Ors. (2005) 11 SCC 520; Anita Enterprises & Anr. v. 
Belfer Coop. Housing Society Ltd. & Ors. [2007] 12 SCR 1 : (2008) 
1 SCC 285 – relied upon.
J.K. (Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. New Kaiser-I-Hind Spinning & Weaving 
Co. Ltd. & Ors. [1969] 2 SCR 866 : (1970) 1 SCC 556; Haryana 
Financial Corporation v. Jagdamba Oil Mills [2002] 1 SCR 621 : 
(2002) 3 SCC 496; Ram Baran Prasad v. Ram Mohit Hazra [1967] 
1 SCR 293 : AIR 1967 SC 744; Shakeel Ahmed v. Syed Akhlaq 
Hussain [2023] 15 SCR 590 : 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1526 – 
referred to.
Russell v. Russell [1783] 28 E.R. 1121 – referred to.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1093
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
List of Acts
Transfer of Property Act, 1882; Maharashtra Ownership Flats 
(Regulation of the promotion of construction, sale, management and 
transfer) Act, 1963; Maharashtra Apartment Ownership Act, 1970. 
List of Keywords
Equitable mortgage; Charge; Simple mortgage; Debt recovery; Title 
deeds; Enforceability; Right in personam; Transfer of Property Act; 
Debt Recovery Tribunal.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1565 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 12.12.2018 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in WP No. 11324 of 2015
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Ninad Laud, Ivo Dcosta, Guruprasad Naik, Ms. Ishani Shekhar, 
Sahil Tagotra.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Krishan Kumar, Seemant K Garg, Nitin Pal, Nitin Mishra, Ms. Mitali 
Gupta, Hargun Singh Kalra.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.B. Pardiwala, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the 
following parts: -
INDEX*
A.
FACTUAL MATRIX ...........................................................
2
B.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES ..................................
8
i.	
Submissions on behalf of the appellant Cosmos Co. 
Operative Bank .........................................................
8
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.
1094
Supreme Court Reports
ii.	
Submissions on behalf of the respondent no.1; Central 
Bank of India .............................................................
10
C.
ISSUE FOR CONSIDERATION .......................................
11
D.
ANALYSIS ........................................................................
12
i.	
Relevant Provisions ..................................................
12
ii.	
Concept of Equitable Mortgage ...............................
24
iii.	
Nature of an Equitable Mortgage .............................
31
iv.	
Distinction between Mortgage by Deposit of Title 
Deeds under the English Law and under the Transfer 
Of Property Act, 1882 ...............................................
41
E.
CONCLUSION ..................................................................
58
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the 
High Court of Judicature at Bombay (Civil Appellate Jurisdiction) 
dated 12.12.2018 in Writ Petition No.11324 of 2015, by which the 
writ petition filed by the appellant herein seeking to challenge the 
order passed by the (Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal) (for short, 
the “DRAT”) dated 28.08.2015 in Appeal No. 41 of 2007 came to be 
rejected thereby affirming the order passed by the DRAT. 
A.	
FACTUAL MATRIX
3.	
The facts giving rise to this appeal may be summarised as under: -
(a)	 We take notice of the fact that the respondent nos. 2, 3 and 4 
respectively, are the original borrowers. However, the respondent 
No.4 has passed away and therefore his name came to be 
deleted from the array of parties vide order dated 4.12.2020.
(b)	 The original borrowers on the strength of one unregistered 
agreement of sale availed loan facility from the Central Bank 
of India i.e. the respondent No. 1 to the tune of Rs.30,00,000/- 
approximately. What was offered by way of security was a flat 
which the original borrowers proposed to purchase from the 
developer and all that they had on the day and date when they 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1095
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
went before the bank to avail the loan was an unregistered 
agreement of sale.
(c)	
It is not in dispute that the Central Bank on the strength of an 
unregistered agreement of sale sanctioned the loan creating 
a charge over the flat.
(d)	 Since the borrowers defaulted in the repayment of the loan, 
the Central Bank initiated proceedings for the recovery of the 
requisite amount before the Debt Recovery Tribunal-I, Mumbai 
(in short “the DRT”). The DRT Mumbai adjudicated the Original 
Application No. 74 of 2002 and held the borrowers jointly and 
severally liable to pay an amount of ₹43,15,405.56 paisa with 
interest thereon @15% per annum from the date of filing of the 
O.A. till its payment.
(e)	 The relevant observations made by the DRT, Mumbai in Para 8 
reads thus: -
“8. In application affidavit of the applicant state that 
the Defendant No. 2 with intention to create mortgage 
deposited title deeds of her flat No. C-28, Sahyadari 
Apartment, L.T. Road, Borivali West, Bombay-400092 
as security of the loan. sanctioned to Defendant 
No. l. To prove this fact the Applicant’s side rely on 
Exh. 53, which is an unregistered memorandum. It 
being unregistered document itself is not sufficient 
to create the mortgage. The applicants state further 
on 04.02.1993, the Defendant No. 2 again attended 
Applicants office and re-deposited the title deeds 
of her flat on the enhanced, revised loan. The 
applicant’s case about mortgage is based on the title 
deeds, the documents produced by Defendants to 
create the mortgage. That was primary evidence. It 
was not produced. Memorandum, Exh. 53 affidavit 
and pleading of applicant cannot take place. The 
applicant do not state or explain why that primary, 
basic evidence is not brought before the Tribunal. 
Unless these documents are on record, it cannot 
be assessed/ascertained whether those documents 
were sufficient to create mortgage or not. In all the 
circumstances, I hold the applicant failed in proving 
1096
Supreme Court Reports
the Defendant No. 2 mortgaged her flat as a security 
of the loan given by the Applicants.”
(f)	
The operative part of the order passed by the DRT reads thus: -
“A) The Defendant No. 2 and 3 shall jointly and 
severally pay the amount of Rs. 43,15,405.56 ps 
(Rupees Forty Three Lacs Fifteen Thousand Four 
Hundred Five and Paise Fifty Six only) to the Applicant 
with interest thereon @ 15% p.a. from the date of 
filing of this application till the payment.
B) The defendant No. 2 shall pay the Applicant, the 
amount of Rs. 5,70,787.21 ps. (Rupees Five Lacs 
Seventy Thousand Seven Hundred Eight Seven 
and Paise Twenty One Only) as dues of Overdraft 
Accounts, Rs. 4,08,157.25 ps. (Rupees Four Lacs 
Eight Hundred One Hundred Fifty Seven and Paise 
Twenty Five only) as due of Short Term Loan Account, 
Rs. 2,25,498.45 ps. (Rupees Two Lacs Twenty Five 
Thousand Four Hundred Ninety Eight and Paise 
Forty Five only) as dues of Working Capital Loan 
with interest thereon @ 15% p.a.
C) The Applicant will be entitled to recover this amount 
from the hypothecation created by the defendants as 
mentioned in the application of the defendants fail to 
pay the above amount.”
D) The defendants No. 2 & 3 shall pay cost of this 
Application to the applicant and to bear their own 
costs”.
(g)	 The Central Bank of India had to file an appeal before the DRAT 
because of the observations made by the DRT in its order as 
contained in para 8 referred to above.
(h)	 The order passed by the DRAT, allowing the appeal filed by 
the Central Bank reads thus: -
“1. This appeal has been filed by the plaintiffs /
appellant herein being aggrieved by the order dated 
30/11/2006 passed by the learned Presiding Officer, 
DRT-I, Mumbai in O.A. No. 74 of 2002, whereby the 
learned Presiding Officer directed the defendant nos. 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1097
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
2 and 3 to jointly and severally pay the amount of 
Rs.43,15,405.56 ps. to the applicant with interest 
thereon @15% p.a. from the date of filing of the 
application till its payment. Further directed the 
defendant No. 2 to pay the amount of Rs.5,70,787.21 
ps. as dues of Overdraft Accounts, Rs. 4,08,157.25 
ps. as dues of Short Term Loan Account and 
Rs.2,25,498.45 ps. as dues of Working Capital Loan 
with interest thereon @15% p.a.
2. The ld. counsel for the appellant raised two grounds 
namely the description made by the defendant no.1 
is not correct one and second ground is that the 
original title deeds have not been produced before 
this court. Hence he prayed that the appeal has to 
be allowed against the defendant no.1 alone. The 
suit has been dismissed against the defendant no.1. 
Anyhow the suit against the defendant nos. 2 and 3 
has been decreed.
3. The contention of the ld. counsel for the appellant 
is that the defendant no.1 is real borrower and is 
sued in his personal capacity as proprietor of M/s. 
Ajanta Industries which is evident from Para No. 2. 
Hence he prayed that the appeal has to be allowed.
4. The contention of the respondent is that the mortgage 
has not been proved before the DRT. Hence the suit 
has been rightly dismissed. Thereafter respondent 
no. 4 has advanced the loan to the respondent no. 1 
and thereafter the property is sold to the third person. 
Hence he prayed that the appeal has to be dismissed.
5. From the perusal it is seen that it has been 
mentioned that the respondent no.1 was sued in 
his personal and individual capacity as proprietor of 
M/s. Ajanta Industries as clearly set out in Para No.2. 
Hence as per Order 30 Rule 10 he has been properly 
described, hence the finding in this regard given by 
the DRT has to be set aside and in turn is set aside.
6. The next contention is that the original documents 
have not been produced before the trial court is not in 
1098
Supreme Court Reports
dispute. Now it has been produced before this court 
which pertains to the mortgaged property and original 
agreement are now brought on record and is taken on 
record. It is pertinent to note that the original title deeds 
are with the appellants and mortgage is not denied 
by the guarantor. It is also clear that respondent no.4 
do not have title deeds pertaining to the property and 
their alleged mortgage is very much subsequent to 
the mortgage of appellants. Hence, I am of the view 
that it can be accepted that the appellant bank has 
valid and subsisting mortgage in its favour and in turn 
mortgage is admitted and finding given by the DRT in 
this regard has to be set aside and the O.A. against 
the defendant no.1 also decreed and allowed as all 
parties are properly sued and joined.
7. The appeal is allowed.
8. Subsequent to sale by respondent no. 4 in favor 
of third party and amount of deposit is concerned, 
this point is left open to agitate before the appropriate 
forum.”
(i)	
While the proceedings before the DRAT were pending in the 
form of appeal filed by the Central Bank of India, the appellant 
bank herein had to intervene, and they were also heard on the 
question as to which bank had the first charge over the security 
interest created by the original borrowers.
(j)	
The appellant bank herein being dissatisfied with the order 
passed by the DRAT referred to above challenged the same 
by filing a writ petition before the High Court. The High court 
proceeded on the footing that the DRAT was right in recording 
a finding that the mortgage of the flat in question created in 
favour of the appellant bank herein was subsequent in point of 
time and besides the same, the appellant bank had no valid title 
deeds with them at the time of sanctioning the loan in favour 
of the original borrowers.
(k)	
In short, the finding of fact recorded by the High Court in its 
impugned judgment is that the flat was mortgaged with the 
Central Bank of India on 31.10.1989, whereas the mortgage 
claimed by the appellant Bank herein was of October, 1998. 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1099
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
(l)	
The High Court observing as aforesaid, rejected the writ petition 
filed by the appellant herein. The relevant observations made 
by the High Court in its impugned judgment read thus: -
“6. By the impugned order, therefore, the DRAT had 
arrived at a clear finding of fact that the mortgage 
of the said flat to the Petitioner-Cosmos Bank is 
‘subsequent’ to the mortgage of the Respondent-
Central Bank apart from the fact that the Petitioner-
Cosmos Bank did not have title deeds pertaining to 
the said flat. This finding was arrived at by DRAT 
as the said flat was mortgaged to the Respondent-
Central Bank on 31-10-1989, whereas the mortgage 
claimed by the Petitioner-Cosmos Bank was of 
October 1998.
7. It is brought out in the Affidavit-in-Reply of the 
Respondent-Central Bank that the Respondent-
Central Bank had Initially filed a suit against the 
borrower/guarantors (Respondents Nos.2 to 4 herein) 
in this Court on 5 September 1994. By an interim 
order dated 20-10-1994, this Court had appointed a 
Court Receiver in respect of the said flat.
8. It would thus be evident that at the time of sanction 
and grant of the Loan by the Petitioner-Cosmos 
Bank i.e. sometime in November 1998, the said flat 
was in custodia legis as the Court Receiver was 
appointed in the year 1994. In these circumstances, 
there appears to be substance in this submission 
of the learned Counsel for the Respondent-Central. 
Bank that the validity of the mortgage of the said flat 
in favour of the Petitioner-Cosmos Bank was even 
otherwise questionable. The suit which was filed in 
this Court was ultimately transferred to DRT only in 
the year 2002 and numbered as O.A.No. 74 of 2002. 
Before this Court, the Petitioner-Cosmos Bank have 
essentially relied upon the Share Certificate which was 
as a matter of fact issued by the Society only in the 
year 1989 (as the Society itself was formed in the year 
1986-87) and Agreement for Sale dated 7-12-1978 
1100
Supreme Court Reports
(which is subsequent to Agreement for Sale dated 
09-11-1978 relied upon by the Respondent-Central 
Bank). Both the Agreements are unregistered. It Is 
not even pleaded by the Petitioner-Cosmos Bank in 
the present Petition that the documents of title deeds 
relied upon by the Respondent-Central Bank were not 
credible or that the mortgage of the said flat in favour 
of the Respondent-Central Bank was not valid. In any 
event, it can be hardly disputed that the mortgage in 
favour of the Respondent- Central Bank was prior 
in point of time. In the circumstances, in our view, 
the DRAT rightly held in the impugned order that the 
alleged mortgage of the Petitioner-Cosmos Bank was 
subsequent in point of time to the mortgage of the 
Respondent-Central Bank.
9. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we are unable 
to find fault with the impugned order of the DRAT. 
The Petition is, accordingly, dismissed. The Recovery 
Officer, DRT may now pass appropriate orders as 
regards the distribution of the sale proceeds of the 
said flat which has been deposited in the DRT.”
4.	
In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant bank is here 
before this Court with the present appeal.
B.	
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
i.	
Submissions on behalf of the appellant Cosmos Co. 
Operative Bank.
5.	
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant bank vehemently 
submitted that the High Court committed an egregious error in 
rejecting the writ petition filed by his client and thereby affirming an 
equally egregious order passed by the DRAT.
6.	
He would submit that indisputably the first mortgage was created 
in favour of the Central Bank of India, but the said mortgage was 
invalid or rather having no force in law. According to him any bank, 
while sanctioning the loan would ensure that what is being offered by 
way of security is something valid. In such circumstances, when an 
unregistered agreement of sale was offered as a title deed, it was of 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1101
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
no value as it is a settled law that agreement of sale does not confer 
any right title or interest. Far from being a registered agreement of 
sale, in the case on hand, what was offered by way of security to 
the Central Bank was an unregistered agreement of sale.
7.	
In the aforesaid context, the learned counsel first invited the attention 
of this Court to Section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1884 (for 
short, the “Act, 1884”) which defines the terms sale. Thereafter he 
invited the attention of this Court to Section 58 of the Act, 1884 which 
defines the term “Mortgage”, “mortgagor”, “mortgagee”, “mortgage-
money” and “mortgage-deed”.
8.	
He laid much emphasis on sub-section (a) of Section 58, which 
explains what is mortgage. Thereafter, he invited the attention of the 
Court to Section 100 of the Act, 1884 which explains what is “charge”.
9.	
The learned counsel thereafter invited the attention of this Court to 
certain provisions of the Maharashtra Ownership Flats (Regulation 
of the promotion of construction, sale, management and transfer) 
Act, 1963 (for short the “Act 1963”) more particularly Section(s) 4, 
4A and 11 therein, respectively.
10.	 He thereafter invited the attention of this Court to few provisions of 
the Maharashtra Apartment Ownership Act 1970 (for short the “Act, 
1970”) more particularly the preamble to the Act and Sections 2, 4 
and 5 respectively.
11.	 To fortify his submissions more particularly the principal contention 
that the respondent no. 1 Bank cannot be said to have the first 
charge over the mortgaged property, he relied on few decisions of 
this Court, which are as under: -
i.	
Suraj Lamp & Industries (P) Ltd. (2) through Director v. 
State of Haryana and Another reported in (2012) 1 SCC 656 
more particularly paras 16 and 19 respectively therein.
ii.	
Bank of India v. Abhay D. Narottam and Others reported in 
(2005) 11 SCC 520 more particularly the observations made 
in paras 9 and 11 respectively therein. 
iii.	
Anita Enterprises and Anr. v. Belfer Coop. Housing Society 
Ltd. and Ors. reported in (2008) 1 SCC 285 more particularly 
the observations made in para 41 therein.
1102
Supreme Court Reports
iv.	
Dattatreya Shanker Mote and Ors. v. Anand Chintaman Datar 
and Ors. reported in (1974) 2 SCC 799 more particularly the 
observations made in para 67 therein.”
12.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel prayed 
that there being merit in his appeal, the same may be allowed and 
the impugned order passed by the High Court may be set aside.
ii.	
Submissions on behalf of the respondent no.1; Central 
Bank of India. 
13.	 On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the Central 
Bank of India submitted that no error not to speak of any error of 
law could be said to have been committed by the High Court in 
passing the impugned order. He would submit that indisputably 
the first charge over the mortgaged property is that of the Central 
Bank.
14.	 At this stage, we must record that the learned counsel wanted to place 
few additional documents on record to make good his case that the 
view taken by the High Court is correct. However, considering the 
fact that this litigation is pending past almost 10 years, we declined 
such request.
15.	 We requested the learned counsel to proceed on the basis of the 
material on record and make good his case that the impugned order 
passed by the High Court needs no interference.
16.	 He would submit that there are concurrent findings recorded by the 
DRAT and by the High Court in so far as the validity of the mortgage 
is concerned and also which bank has the first charge over the 
mortgaged property.
17.	 In such circumstances, referred to above, the learned counsel would 
submit that there being no merit in this appeal, the same may be 
dismissed.
C.	
ISSUE FOR CONSIDERATION
18.	 Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and 
having gone through the materials on record, the only question that 
falls for our consideration is whether the High Court committed any 
error in passing the impugned order.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1103
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
D.	
ANALYSIS
i.	
Relevant Provisions
19.	 Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we 
must look into the few provisions of the law relevant for the purpose 
of deciding the present appeal which are as follows: -
SECTION(S) 58 AND 100 OF THE ACT, 1884.
“58. “Mortgage”, “mortgagor”, “mortgagee”, “mortgage-
money” and “mortgage-deed” defined.—
(a) A mortgage is the transfer of an interest in specific 
immoveable property for the purpose of securing the 
payment of money advanced or to be advanced by way 
of loan, an existing or future debt, or the performance 
of an engagement which may give rise to a pecuniary 
liability. The transferor is called a mortgagor, the transferee 
a mortgagee; the principal money and interest of which 
payment is secured for the time being arc called the 
mortgage-money, and the instrument (if any) by which the 
transfer is effected is called a mortgage-deed. 
(b) Simple mortgage.— Where, without delivering 
possession of the mortgaged property, the mortgagor binds 
himself personally to pay the mortgage-money, and agrees, 
expressly or impliedly, that, in the event of his failing to 
pay according to his contract, the mortgagee shall have a 
right to cause the mortgaged property to be sold and the 
proceeds of sale to be applied, so far as may be necessary, 
in payment of the mortgage-money, the transaction is called 
a simple mortgage and the mortgagee a simple mortgagee. 
(c) Mortgage by conditional sale.— Where the mortgagor 
ostensibly sells the mortgaged property— on condition that 
on default of payment of the mortgage-money on a certain 
date the sale shall become absolute, or on condition that on 
such payment being made the sale shall become void, or 
on condition that on such payment being made the buyer 
shall transfer the property to the seller, the transaction is 
called a mortgage by conditional sale and the mortgagee 
a mortgagee by conditional sale: 
1104
Supreme Court Reports
Provided that no such transaction shall be deemed to 
be a mortgage, unless the condition is embodied in the 
document which effects or purports to effect the sale.
(d) Usufructuary mortgage.— Where the mortgagor delivers 
possession or expressly or by implication binds himself 
to deliver possession of the mortgaged property to the 
mortgagee, and authorises him to retain such possession 
until payment of the mortgage-money, and to receive the 
rents and profits accruing from the property or any part 
of such rents and profits and to appropriate the same in 
lieu of interest, or in payment of the mortgage -money, 
or partly in lieu of interest or partly in payment of the 
mortgage-money, the transaction is called an usufructuary 
mortgage and the mortgagee an usufructuary mortgagee.
(e) English mortgage.— Where the mortgagor binds 
himself to re-pay the mortgage-money on a certain date, 
and transfers the mortgaged property absolutely to the 
mortgagee, but subject to a proviso that he will re-transfer 
it to the mortgagor upon payment of the mortgage-money 
as agreed, the transaction is called an English mortgage. 
(f) Mortgage by deposit of title-deeds.— Where a person in 
any of the following towns, namely, the towns of Calcutta, 
Madras, and Bombay, and in any other town which the 
State Government concerned may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, delivers to a creditor 
or his agent documents of title to immoveable property, 
with intent to create a security thereon, the transaction is 
called a mortgage by deposit of title-deeds.
(g) Anomalous mortgage.—A mortgage which is not a 
simple mortgage, a mortgage by conditional sale, an 
usufructuary mortgage, an English mortgage or a mortgage 
by deposit of title-deeds within the meaning of this section 
is called an anomalous mortgage.”
“100. Charges.—
Where immoveable property of one person is by act of 
parties or operation of law made security for the payment 
of money to another, and the transaction does not amount 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1105
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
to a mortgage, the latter person is said to have a charge 
on the property; and all the provisions hereinbefore 
contained which apply to a simple mortgage shall, so far 
as may be, apply to such charge. Nothing in this section 
applies to the charge of a trustee on the trust property for 
expenses properly incurred in the execution of his trust, 
5 [and, save as otherwise expressly provided by any law 
for the time being in force, no charge shall be enforced 
against any property in the hands of a person to whom 
such property has been transferred for consideration and 
without notice of the charge.”
SECTIONS 4, 4A AND 11 RESPECTIVELY OF THE ACT, 1963
“4. Promoter before accepting advance payment or 
deposit to enter into agreement and agreement to be 
registered. –
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, 
a promoter who intends to construct or constructs a block 
or building of flats, all or some of which are to be taken or 
are taken on ownership basis, shall, before, he accepts 
any sum of money as advance payment or deposit, which 
shall not be more than 20 per cent. of the sale price 
enter into a written agreement for sale with each of such 
persons who are to take or have taken such flats, and 
the agreement shall be registered under the Registration 
Act, 1908 (hereinafter in this section referred to as “the 
Registration Act”) and such agreement shall be in the 
prescribed form.”	
(lA) The agreement to be prescribed and sub-section (1) 
shall contain inter alia the particulars as specified in clause 
(a); and to such agreement there shall be attached the 
copies of the documents specified in clause (b),- 
(a) particulars,- 
(i) if the building is to be constructed, the liability of 
the promoter to construct it according to the plans 
and specifications approved by the local authority 
where such approval is required under any law for 
the time being in force;
1106
Supreme Court Reports
(ii) the date by which the possession of the flat is to 
be handed over to the purchaser;
(iii) the extent of the carpet area of the flat including 
the area of the balconies which should be shown 
separately; 
(iv) the price of the flat including the proportionate 
price of the common areas and facilities which should 
be shown separately, to be paid by the purchaser of 
flat; and the intervals at which instalments thereof 
may be paid; 
(v) the precise nature of organisation to be constituted 
of the persons who have taken or are to take the flats; 
(vi) the nature, extent and description of limited 
common areas and facilities; 
(vii) the nature, extent and description of limited 
common areas and facilities, if any; 
(viii) percentage of undivided interest in the common 
areas and facilities appertaining to the flat agreed 
to be sold; 
(ix) statement of the use of which the flat is intended 
and restriction of its use, if any; 
(x) percentage of undivided interests in the limited 
common areas and facilities, if any, appertaining to 
the flat agreed to be sold; 
(b) copies of documents,-
(i) the certificate by an Attorney at law or Advocate 
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 3;
(ii) Property Card or extract of village Forms VI or 
VII and XII or any other relevant revenue record 
showing the nature of the title of the promoter to the 
land on which the flats are constructed or are to be 
constructed;
(iii) the plans and specifications of the flat as approved 
by the concerned local authority.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1107
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
(2) Any agreement for sale entered into under sub-
section (1) shall be presented by the promoter or by any 
other person competent to do so under section 32 of 
the Registration Act, at the proper registration office for 
registration, within the time allowed under sections 23 to 26 
(both inclusive) to the said Act and execution thereof shall 
be admitted before the registering officer by the person 
executing the document or his representative, assign or 
agent as laid down in sections 34 and 35 of the said Act 
also within the time aforesaid:
Provided that, where any agreement for sale is entered 
into, or is purported to be entered into, under sub-
section (1), at any time before the commencement of 
the Maharashtra Ownership Flats (Regulation of the 
promotion of construction, sale, management and transfer) 
(Amendment and Validating Provisions) Act, 1983, and 
such agreement was not presented for registration or was 
presented for registration but its execution was not admitted 
before the registration officer by the person concerned, 
before the commencement of the said Act, then such 
document may be presented at the proper registration 
office for registration, and its execution may be admitted, 
by any of the persons concerned referred to above in 
this sub-section, on or before the 31st December 1984, 
and the registering officer shall accept such document for 
registration, and register it under the Registration Act, as if 
it were presented, and its execution was admitted, within 
the time laid down in the Registration Act:
Provided further that, on presenting a document for 
registration as aforesaid if the person executing such 
document or his representative, assign or agent does 
not appear before the registering officer and admit the 
execution of the document, the registering officer shall 
cause a summons to be issued under section 36 of the 
Registration Act requiring the executant to appear at the 
registration office, either in person or by duly authorised 
agent, at a time fixed in the summons. If the executant fails 
to appear in compliance with the summons, the execution 
on the document shall be deemed to be admitted by him 
1108
Supreme Court Reports
and the registering officer may proceed to register the 
document accordingly. If the executant appears before the 
registering officer as required by the summons but denies 
execution of the document, the registering officer shall, 
after giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard, 
if satisfied that the document has been executed by him, 
proceed to register the document accordingly.
4A. Effect of non-registration of agreement required 
to be registered under section 4.-
Where an agreement for sale entered into under sub-
section (1) of section 4, whether entered into before or 
after the commencement of the Maharashtra Ownership 
Flats (Regulation of the promotion of construction, sale, 
Management and transfer) (Amendment and Validating 
Provisions) Act, 1983, remains unregistered for any reason, 
then notwithstanding anything contained in any law for 
the time being in force, or in any judgement, decree or 
order of any Court, it may be received as evidence of a 
contract in a suit for specific performance under Chapter 
II of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, or as evidence of part 
performance of a contract for the purposes of section 53A 
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, or as evidence of 
any collateral transaction not required to be effected by 
registered instrument.
xxx
xxx
xxxx
11. Promoter to convey title, etc., and execute 
documents, according to agreement-
(1) A promoter shall take all necessary steps to complete 
his title and convey to the organisation of persons, who 
take flats, which is registered either as a co-operative 
society or as a company as aforesaid or to an association 
of flat takers or apartment owners, his right, title and 
interest in the land and building, and execute all relevant 
documents therefor in accordance with the agreement 
executed under section 4 and if no period for the execution 
of the conveyance is agreed upon, he shall execute the 
conveyance within the prescribed period and also deliver 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1109
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
all documents of title relating to the property which may 
be in his possession or power.
(2) It shall be the duty of the promoter to file with the 
Competent Authority, within the prescribed period, a copy 
of the conveyance executed by him under sub-section (1). 
(3) If the promoter fails to execute the conveyance in 
favour of the Cooperative society formed under section 10 
or, as the case may be, the Company or the association 
of apartment owners, as provided by sub-section (1), 
within the prescribed period, the members of such Co-
operative society or, as the case may be, the Company 
or the association of apartment owners may, make an 
application, in writing, to the concerned Competent 
Authority accompanied by the true copies of the registered 
agreements for sale, executed with the promoter by each 
individual member of the society or the Company or the 
association, who have purchased the flats and all other 
relevant documents (including the occupation certificate, 
if any), for issuing a certificate that such society, or as 
the case may be, Company or association, is entitled to 
have an unilateral deemed conveyance, executed in their 
favour and to have it registered. 
(4) The Competent Authority, on receiving such application, 
within reasonable time and in any case not later than six 
months, after making such enquiry as deemed necessary 
and after verifying the authenticity of the documents 
submitted and after giving the promoter a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, on being satisfied that it is a 
fit case for issuing such certificate, shall issue a certificate 
to the Sub-Registrar or any other appropriate Registration 
Officer under the Registration Act, 1908, certifying that it is 
a fit case for enforcing unilateral execution, of conveyance 
deed conveying the right, title and interest of the promoter 
in the land and building in favour of the applicant, as 
deemed conveyance.
(5) On submission by such society or as the case may 
be, the Company or the association of apartment owners, 
to the Sub-Registrar or the concerned appropriate 
1110
Supreme Court Reports
Registration Officer appointed under the Registration Act, 
1908, the certificate issued by the Competent Authority 
alongwith the unilateral instrument of conveyance, the 
Sub-Registrar or the concerned appropriate registration 
Officer shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Registration Act, 1908, issue summons to the promoter to 
show cause why, such unilateral instrument should not be 
registered as ‘deemed conveyance’ and after giving the 
promoter and the applicants a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard, may on being satisfied that it was fit case 
for unilateral conveyance, register that instrument as, 
‘deemed conveyance’.”
SECTIONS 2, 4 AND 5 RESPECTIVELY OF THE ACT, 
1970
“2. Application of the Act. -
This Act applies only to property, the sole owner or all of 
the owners of which submit the same to the provisions of 
this Act by duly executing and registering a Declaration 
as hereinafter provided : Provided that, no property shall 
be submitted to the provisions of this Act, unless it is used 
or proposed to be used for residence, office, practice of 
any profession or for carrying on any occupation, trade 
or business or for any other type of independent use :
xxx
xxx
xxxx
4. Status of apartments. – 
Subject to the provisions of the second proviso to section 
2 of this Act, each apartment, together with its undivided 
interest in the common areas and facilities, appurtenant to 
such apartment, shall for all purposes constitute heritable 
and transferable immoveable property within the meaning 
of any law for the time being in force in the State; 
and accordingly, an apartment owner may transfer his 
apartment and the percentage of undivided interest in the 
common areas and facilities appurtenant to such apartment 
by way of sale, mortgage, lease, gift, exchange or in any 
other manner whatsoever in the same manner, to the 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1111
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
same extent and subject to the same rights, privileges, 
obligations, liabilities, investigations, legal proceedings, 
remedies and to penalty, forfeiture and punishment as 
any other immoveable property, or make a bequest of 
the same under the laws applicable to the transfer and 
succession of immoveable property.
5. Ownership of apartments. – 
(1) Each apartment owner shall be entitled to the exclusive 
ownership and possession of his apartment in accordance 
with the Declaration executed and registered as required 
by section 2 of this Act. 
(2) Each apartment owner shall execute a Deed of 
Apartment in relation to his apartment in the manner 
prescribed for the purpose.”
20.	 Without any doubt in our mind, we say that the High Court fell in 
error more particularly, in view of, what has been observed in para 
8 of the impugned order. The law is very well settled as explained 
by this Court in Suraj Lamp (supra) that a contract of sale i.e. an 
agreement of sale does not itself create any interest in or charge 
on any property. This is evident on plain reading of Section 54 of 
the Act, 1884 which we have referred to above.
21.	 In the aforesaid context, the decision of this Court in Abhay D. 
Narottam (supra) is also relevant more particularly the observations 
made in para 11 therein. Paras 9 and 11 read thus: -
“9. It is not necessary for us to determine the import of 
Section 125 of the Companies Act as we are of the opinion 
that the appeal must be dismissed on a much more basic 
ground. “Mortgage” has been defined in Section 58(a) of the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 as a transfer of an interest 
in specific immovable property for the purpose of securing 
the payment of money advanced or to be advanced by 
way of loan, etc. Without a transfer of interest there is no 
question of there being a mortgage. The same principle 
would apply to a charge under Section 100 of the Transfer 
of Property Act. Section 100 provides that all the provisions 
which apply to a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, 
apply to such charge. The definition of simple mortgage in 
1112
Supreme Court Reports
Section 58(b) of the Act merely speaks of the procedure 
and describes that species of mortgage.
xxx
xxx
xxxx
11. As far as the flat is concerned, it needs no authority 
to say that a contract for sale of immovable property does 
not of itself create any interest in or charge over such 
property. This is provided in Section 54 of the Act and is 
well-settled law. In this case, the agreement for sale which 
was deposited by Respondent 2 with the appellant Bank 
was not an agreement by which Respondent 2 agreed 
to sell the property to a third party, but an agreement to 
sell the flat to Respondent 2. No interest was created in 
favour of Respondent 2 by virtue of this agreement for sale 
which could have been transferred by way of security to 
the appellant Bank. There is as such no question of the 
appellant Bank having any charge over such non-existent 
interest.”
(Emphasis supplied)
22.	 The observations referred to above are directly applicable to the 
facts of the present case.
23.	 The observations made by this Court in Dattatreya Shanker Mote 
(supra), more particularly, in para 67 also assumes significance. 
Para 67 reads thus: -
“67. The contention was that, although a charge may not 
be described as “a transfer”, yet, the result of Section 100 
of the Act was to equate it with a simple mortgage which 
is a transfer because Section 100 says: “all the provisions 
hereinbefore contained which apply to a simple mortgage 
shall, so far as may be, apply to such charge”. I think that, 
apart from the qualifying words, “so far as may be”, used 
by Section 100 of the Act, a condition essential to the 
applicability of Section 48 of the Act is that there must be an 
actual transfer of property. Furthermore, another condition for 
invoking Section 48 of the Act is that the previous and the 
subsequently created rights “cannot all exist or be exercised 
to their full extent together”. In the case before us, this does 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1113
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
not appear from facts found. In any case, the prior right 
of the charge-holders could only obtain priority provided 
other things are not unequal. This follows from words 
used indicating that each of the two or more transactions 
must at least be a “transfer”. Furthermore, the conditions 
of priority as between the holder of a previous charge and 
a subsequent simple mortgage are completely covered by 
Section 100 of the Act. The principle underlying Section 
48 is one expressed in the maxim of Equity: “Qui prior est 
tempore potior est jure” (first in time is stronger in right). 
This principle, applied to ranking between rival equitable 
claims, is applied by Section 48 to contending claims of 
otherwise equal legal validity. The effect of Section 100 is 
that while a charge, which is not a “transfer” of property, gets 
recognition as a legally enforceable claim, that enforceability 
is subjected by the proviso to the requirements of a prior 
notice in order to give it precedence over a legally valid 
transfer of property. The rights of the appellants charge-
holders could only be exercised, on facts found, subject 
to the priority obtained by the respondent mortgagee’s 
rights. This clear result of the law, as contained in Section 
100 of the Act, cannot be defeated by invoking either the 
terms of or the principles underlying Section 48 of the Act 
read with the first part only of Section 100 of the Act. If 
the respondent simple mortgagee Oswal could not have 
claimed the benefit of the proviso to Section 100, the first 
part of Section 100, read with Section 48 of the Act, could 
have come to the aid of the appellants. But, on the view 
adopted by me, this line of reasoning does not help the 
unfortunate charge-holders at all.”
(Emphasis supplied)
24.	 The observations made by this Court in Anita Enterprises (supra) 
in para 41 are also relevant. The para 41 reads thus: -
“41. It appears to us that the status of a member in a 
tenant co-partnership housing society is very peculiar. The 
ownership of the land and building both vests in the society 
and the member has, for all practical purposes, right of 
occupation in perpetuity after the full value of the land and 
1114
Supreme Court Reports
building and interest accrued thereon have been paid by 
him. Although de jure he is not owner of the flat allotted 
to him, but, in fact, he enjoys almost all the rights which 
an owner enjoys, which includes right to transfer in case 
he fulfils the two preconditions, namely, he occupies the 
property for a period of one year and the transfer is made 
in favour of a person who is already a member or a person 
whose application for membership has been accepted 
by the society or whose appeal under Section 23 of the 
Societies Act has been allowed by the Registrar or to a 
person who is deemed to be a member under sub-section 
(1-A) of Section 23 of the Societies Act. In case any of 
these two conditions is not fulfilled, a member cannot be 
said to have any right of transfer. Thus, we reiterate the 
law laid down by this Court in Sanwarmal [(1990) 2 SCC 
288] that a member has more than a mere right to occupy 
the flat, meaning thereby higher than tenant, which is not 
so in the case of a tenant within the meaning of Section 
5(11) of the Rent Act. This being the position, we have 
no difficulty in coming to the conclusion that the status of 
a member in the case of tenant co-partnership housing 
society cannot be said to be that of a tenant within the 
meaning of Section 5(11) of the Rent Act, as such there 
was no relationship of landlord and tenant between the 
Society and the member.”
(Emphasis supplied)
25.	 The observations made by this Court in Suraj Lamp (supra) in paras 
16 and 19 are also relevant. The paras 16 and 19 respectively read 
thus: -
“Scope of an agreement of sale 
16. Section 54 of the TP Act makes it clear that a contract 
of sale, that is, an agreement of sale does not, of itself, 
create any interest in or charge on such property. This 
Court in Narandas Karsondas v. S.A. Kamtam [(1977) 3 
SCC 247] observed: (SCC pp. 254-55, paras 32-33 & 37) 
“32. A contract of sale does not of itself create 
any interest in, or charge on, the property. This is 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1115
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
expressly declared in Section 54 of the Transfer 
of Property Act. (See Ram Baran Prasad v. Ram 
Mohit Hazra [AIR 1967 SC 744 : (1967) 1 SCR 
293] .) The fiduciary character of the personal 
obligation created by a contract for sale is 
recognised in Section 3 of the Specific Relief 
Act, 1963, and in Section 91 of the Trusts Act. 
The personal obligation created by a contract of 
sale is described in Section 40 of the Transfer 
of Property Act as an obligation arising out 
of contract and annexed to the ownership of 
property, but not amounting to an interest or 
easement therein. 
33. In India, the word ‘transfer’ is defined with 
reference to the word ‘convey’. … The word 
‘conveys’ in Section 5 of the Transfer of Property 
Act is used in the wider sense of conveying 
ownership. 
***
37. … that only on execution of conveyance, 
ownership passes from one party to another….” 
xxx
xxx
xxxx
19. Any contract of sale (agreement to sell) which is not 
a registered deed of conveyance (deed of sale) would fall 
short of the requirements of Sections 54 and 55 of the TP 
Act and will not confer any title nor transfer any interest in 
an immovable property (except to the limited right granted 
under Section 53-A of the TP Act). According to the TP Act, 
an agreement of sale, whether with possession or without 
possession, is not a conveyance. Section 54 of the TP Act 
enacts that sale of immovable property can be made only 
by a registered instrument and an agreement of sale does 
not create any interest or charge on its subject-matter.”
(Emphasis supplied)
26.	 Suraj Lamp (supra) later came to be referred to and relied upon by 
this Court in Shakeel Ahmed v. Syed Akhlaq Hussain reported in 
1116
Supreme Court Reports
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1526 wherein the Court after referring to its 
earlier judgment held that the person relying upon the customary 
documents cannot claim to be the owner of the immovable property 
and consequently not maintain any claims against a third-party. The 
relevant paras read as under: -
“10. Having considered the submissions at the outset, it is to 
be emphasized that irrespective of what was decided in the 
case of Suraj Lamps and Industries (supra) the fact remains 
that no title could be transferred with respect to immovable 
properties on the basis of an unregistered Agreement to 
Sell or on the basis of an unregistered General Power of 
Attorney. The Registration Act, 1908 clearly provides that 
a document which requires compulsory registration under 
the Act, would not confer any right, much less a legally 
enforceable right to approach a Court of Law on its basis. 
Even if these documents i.e. the Agreement to Sell and 
the Power of Attorney were registered, still it could not 
be said that the respondent would have acquired title 
over the property in question. At best, on the basis of 
the registered agreement to sell, he could have claimed 
relief of specific performance in appropriate proceedings. 
In this regard, reference may be made to sections 17 and 
49 of the Registration Act and section 54 of the Transfer 
of Property Act, 1882.
11. Law is well settled that no right, title or interest in 
immovable property can be conferred without a registered 
document. Even the judgment of this Court in the case 
of Suraj Lamps & Industries (supra) lays down the same 
proposition. Reference may also be made to the following 
judgments of this Court:
(i). Ameer Minhaj v. Deirdre Elizabeth (Wright) Issar–(2018) 
7 SCC 639
(ii). Balram Singh v. Kelo Devi Civil Appeal No. 6733 of 2022
(iii). Paul Rubber Industries Private Limited v. Amit Chand 
Mitra SLP(C) No. 15774 of 2022.
12. The embargo put on registration of documents would 
not override the statutory provision so as to confer title 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1117
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
on the basis of unregistered documents with respect to 
immovable property. Once this is the settled position, 
the respondent could not have maintained the suit for 
possession and mesne profits against the appellant, who 
was admittedly in possession of the property in question 
whether as an owner or a licensee.
13. The argument advanced on behalf of the respondent 
that the judgment in Suraj Lamps & Industries (supra) 
would be prospective is also misplaced. The requirement 
of compulsory registration and effect on non-registration 
emanates from the statutes, in particular the Registration 
Act and the Transfer of Property Act. The ratio in Suraj 
Lamps & Industries (supra) only approves the provisions 
in the two enactments. Earlier judgments of this Court 
have taken the same view.”
iii.	
Concept of Equitable Mortgage.
27.	 The question whether Central Bank of India i.e., the respondent 
no. 1 herein had a valid mortgage or not can be looked at from one 
another angle. It is an undisputed fact that the original borrowers 
herein whilst availing the loan facility from the respondent no. 1 
bank herein had offered the said flat in question as a security, and 
pursuant to the same had willingly deposited the agreement of sale 
in respect of the same with the respondent no. 1 bank. 
28.	 Although, indisputably as discussed in the foregoing paragraphs the 
said agreement to sale can by no means be treated as title deeds to 
the said flat and as such would not constitute a mortgage in terms 
of Section 58 of the Act, 1884, yet could it be said that there was no 
charge created on the said flat at all by the original borrowers? Could 
it be argued that the failure to deposit the share certificate to the 
said flat at the time of availing the loan for whatsoever reasons by a 
necessary implication nullifies the charge that was intended or sought 
to be created over the said flat in favour of the appellant bank herein, 
merely because the agreement to sale in itself does not purport any 
title even though the intention of the parties was to create a charge 
over the flat? The answer to the same has to be an emphatic “No”.
29.	 Before we proceed to explain the aforesaid, it would be apposite for 
us to understand the concept of “Equitable Mortgage”. Under the 
1118
Supreme Court Reports
English Law, broadly there are two kinds of mortgages; (i) a legal 
mortgage and (ii) an equitable mortgage. A ‘legal mortgage’ entails 
creation of a charge by way of conveyance of a proprietary interest 
over the property or security in favour of the lender in accordance 
with the formalities set out under the Law of Property Act, 1925. 
This is typically effectuated through execution of a deed of charge 
or a mortgage deed simpliciter. While such conveyance need not 
involve transfer of the title or ownership in itself nor is the conveyance 
required to be physical or actual and may be symbolic in nature 
where the borrower or mortgagor continues to retain possession or 
even title of the mortgaged property; however, the de jure effect of 
such conveyance must be in the nature of vesting the lender with 
an enforceable right to take possession, to foreclose or to sell the 
property in the event of default. Thus, the legal effect of the deed of 
charge or mortgage must convey certain enforceable rights in favour 
of the lender or mortgagor over the mortgaged property even though 
the title or ownership may not be transferred. 
30.	 However, there may be instances where the parties agree to 
mortgage a property as security, but no formal charge or conveyance 
of any proprietary interest in the said property has taken place, 
still the same may be recognized as a mortgage. This is popularly 
understood as an ‘equitable mortgage’ where although under the 
law the formalities required for creating a legal charge or mortgage 
over a property are patently absent, yet the said property would 
be in equity deemed to have been mortgaged and as such may 
be apportioned or appropriated by the lender on the strength of 
mere intention of the parties to create a mortgage. In other words, 
where under the law no mortgage or charge is said to have been 
created over a property i.e., no conveyance of a right or interest 
over the subject property has been effected, yet if the intention of 
parties to create a mortgage is clear, equity would demand that 
such intention is not only respected but given some effect to and 
the said property be deemed to have been mortgaged so as to 
enable the lender to assert its rights over the same, it is known as 
an ‘equitable mortgage’.
31.	 The concept or doctrine of ‘equitable mortgage’ owes its origin to 
the English case of Russel v. Russel reported in [1783] 28 E.R. 
1121 wherein the High Court of Chancery speaking through Lord 
Thurlow held that where there is delivery of title by the borrower to 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1119
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
the lender for the purpose of availing a loan, although such deposit 
may not constitute a valid mortgage, but the courts in granting 
specific performance to the lender to create a security or lien over 
the property would effectively be “supplying the legal formalities 
necessary to create nothing but a mortgage though one in equity”. He 
explained that the court in permitting the lender to create a security 
over the property on the strength of the title deeds lying with it is 
not per se performance of a contract but rather its execution and 
hence for all purposes would be a mortgage inter se the borrower 
and the lender in equity. He lastly elaborated that the further grant 
of relief to execute such a contract which is not a valid mortgage 
but nevertheless being converted into one is grounded on it being 
already being a contract part performed. [See; J.B. White & Tudor 
in Equitable Mortgage and Leading Cases in Equity, 9th Ed. (Sweet 
& Maxwell (1928)]
32.	 Thus, the underlying distinction between a legal mortgage and an 
equitable mortgage under the English Law is that in the former, 
there is conveyance or transfer of some proprietary interest in the 
mortgaged property in accordance with the statute or law whereas 
in the latter the formalities required for a legal mortgage are not fully 
satisfied, but the parties’ intentions to create a mortgage are clear 
as result of which it is deemed as a mortgage. 
33.	 The rationale behind the existence of the concept of an ‘equitable 
mortgage’ was elaborated upon by Sir William Holdsworth in  A 
History of English Law. He explained that the evolution of equitable 
mortgage is based on the principle that a mortgage at its core is 
essentially nothing more than a ‘security’. It is not intended as a 
mechanism of transferring either ownership or any vested interest in 
the strict sense but rather only a means for providing a security. He 
elaborated how ‘equitable mortgages’ of today’s time is a reflection 
of the practicalities of the then mercantile system of the time where 
due to the commercial exigencies and need for quick financial 
arrangements led the community to resort to the informal practice 
of extending loans and creating security by mere deposit of titles 
or a promissory note to repay solely on a ‘mutual understanding’ 
between the parties, without any actual agreement or memorandum 
and without following the cumbersome formalities of any transfer of 
conveyance of proprietary rights as required under a traditional or 
legal mortgage.
1120
Supreme Court Reports
34.	 The aforesaid may be better understood through the well-known 
maxim of ‘Quod fieri debuit pro facto censetur’ which means that ‘what 
ought to have been done is considered as done’. Edward Henry Turner 
Snell in his book on The Principles of Equity explained that the role of 
equity in law is only one i.e. to rectify the injustice arising out of the 
rigidities of the law, to intervene and ensure that substantive justice 
prevails over mere formalities or hyper technicalities, even when strict 
legal requirements have not been met. Snell articulated that equity 
operates as a “court of conscience” tempering the harshness of the 
law and fulfilling its enduring mission to deliver fairness and justice 
where the rigid application of legal rules would otherwise result in 
inequity. In the context of mortgages, take a situation where there is 
no express document or deed to evince that a charge was created 
over the subject property and the parties at the time of availing the 
loan merely agreed that they would create a mortgage in the event 
of default. In the eyes of law, it would be said that no mortgage 
has been created whatsoever, yet the understanding between the 
parties to later create a mortgage at the time whilst advancing the 
loan shows the ab initio intention to create a charge and treat the 
subject property as a security or a collateral for the sum so advanced. 
Under the general principle of law, the recourse that would ordinarily 
be available to the lender in the aforesaid situation would be to seek 
specific performance of the said agreement (oral or written) to create 
a mortgage on the strength that there has been part performance 
of the agreement i.e., loan has been advanced and thus, charge 
should now be permitted to be created, and thereafter proceed to 
exercise its rights after the said mortgage is created. But a “court of 
conscience” would instead of subjecting the lender to the rigmarole of 
the law, will directly give effect to the true sum and substance of the 
intention of the parties and thereby give to the very agreement itself 
the effect of creating a mortgage in ‘equity’ and enable the lender to 
exercise its rights as he would be entitled to if the agreement had 
been performed.
35.	 Thus, where a borrower willingly parts away with any title deed or 
a document or a promissory note or an undertaking in respect of a 
property by depositing it with the lender for the purpose of availing 
any credit facility and upon such deposit, the loan is so advanced 
by the lender, fairness, good conscience and justice or in other 
words ‘equity’ would demand that some meaningful significance 
be given to such act or conduct of the parties, as generally such 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1121
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
act of depositing documents against loans is more often than not 
for no other purpose but to create a mortgage. Thus, a “court of 
conscience” would give effect to the intention of the parties in the 
form of an ‘equitable mortgage’ even if there is no formal agreement 
or a shred of document expressly providing that such deposit is for 
the purpose of creating a charge OR if the documents so deposited 
do not necessarily have the effect of transferring or conveyancing 
any title or interest in the subject property to the lender.
iv.	
Nature of an Equitable Mortgage.
36.	 Having understood the concept of ‘equitable mortgage’, it would 
now be apposite to understand the ways in which an equitable 
mortgage may be created and its nature. Under the English Law, 
the two primary ways for creating an ‘equitable mortgage’ is either 
(i) by deposit of the original title deeds to the subject property 
with the lender or where the original title deeds are retained by the 
borrower then (ii) by way of a memorandum of understanding or 
an agreement simpliciter recording the intention of the parties 
to create a charge over the subject property. 
37.	 In the case on hand, the original borrowers had availed loan facilities 
from both, the appellant bank and the respondent no. 1 bank herein by 
deposit of certain documents in respect of the said Flat. For availing 
the loan facility from the respondent no. 1 bank, the original borrowers 
deposited two unregistered agreement to sale dated 15.10.1973 and 
09.11.1978 respectively in relation to the said Flat all the way back in 
1989. Whereas, whilst availing the loan facility from the appellant bank 
herein in the year 1998 the original borrowers deposited one another 
unregistered agreement to sale dated 07.12.1978 in respect of the 
said flat which is subsequent in time along with a share certificate 
of ownership of the said Flat dated 14.09.1989 that was issued by 
the concerned cooperative housing society. 
38.	 Indisputably, when the loan was granted to the original borrowers, 
the share certificate of ownership being the sole document for 
conveyance of title had not been issued by the concerned housing 
society. In such a scenario, could it be said that in order to create 
a mortgage by deposit of title deeds, the respondent no. 1 bank 
was required to take or collect all documents and deeds of title to 
the said Flat in its possession, more particularly when the title deed 
or share certificate of ownership was not in existence at that time? 
1122
Supreme Court Reports
39.	 The High Court of Chancery in Robberts v. Croft reported in 44 E.R. 
887 and a catena of other decisions have emphatically answered 
the aforesaid question in a negative. It has been held that “[...] It 
is not necessary, to create an equitable mortgage, that all the title 
deeds, or even all the material title deeds, should be deposited. It 
is sufficient if the deeds deposited are material evidence of title.” 
40.	 In fact, the English Courts have gone to the extent of saying that 
the title deeds are not the only documents a deposit of which may 
create an equitable charge upon the subject property, and that even a 
promissory note or an agreement for purchase of the subject property 
can create an equitable mortgage. [See; Ex parte Warner, reported 
in [1812] 19 Ves Jr 202; Lacon v. Allen reported in [1856] 3 Drew. 
579]. Samuel Miller in The Law of Equitable Mortgages explained 
the aforesaid with a illustration that take a case where the owner 
has lost an important deed or where the deeds which have been 
deposited while purporting title to the property contain no reference 
to any other material deeds, or a situation where there exists no 
possible way for the lender to ascertain whether any other deeds or 
documents are actually outstanding, should the lender be deprived 
of the benefit of the deposit of the other documents even if the 
intention of parties to create a mortgage is clear? In his opinion, the 
principle underlying the doctrine of ‘equitable mortgages’ is premised 
to mitigate these very hardships or technicalities that often emerge 
in transactions of such nature from coming in the way of creation 
and enforcement of mortgages. He added, to hold otherwise, would 
be nothing but an unfaithful dilution of the doctrine of equitable 
mortgages and by extension the concept of ‘equity’ based justice. 
This is because for deciding a question of an equitable mortgage, the 
court is not required to look for deposit of a valid legal title, because 
no passing or transfer of title is involved in the first place in equitable 
mortgage unlike a legal mortgage, rather what the courts look for is 
a transaction in the nature of a contract whereby the interests of the 
borrower embraced in the subject property may be later subjected 
and made liable for the debt.
41.	 Even though, the High Court of Chancery speaking through Lord 
Eldon in the case of In Re: Rice reported in [1819] 36 E.R. 632 
argued against the idea of extending the doctrine of ‘equitable 
mortgage’ to instances of deposit of ‘part-deeds’ to discourage the act 
of scrupulous borrowers of obtaining loans from multiple creditors by 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1123
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
dividing and depositing different deeds with each of them, the position 
under the English Law has continued to remain the same i.e., part 
deposits of title would be sufficient to create an equitable mortgage 
and that there is neither any requirement that the mortgagee or the 
lender should be required to acquire every title deed, nor is there 
any requirement that the documents so deposited show a good title 
to the vested property. [See; Robberts (supra). What is required is 
that the deeds or documents so deposited materially evinces the 
intention of the parties to create a charge over the subject property 
and the mortgagor assures itself that he has acquired all available 
titles or documents. 
42.	 The Court of Chancery speaking through Lord Eldon in Knight v. 
Knight reported in (1840) 3 Beav 148 held that “equity looks to the 
intent rather than the form”. Thus, even if the document that was 
deposited with the lender falls short, it would still be enforceable in 
equity provided the intention of the parties to do so is as clear as a 
noon day. In the case at hand, even though what was deposited with 
the respondent no. 1 bank herein was nothing but an unregistered 
agreement to sale having no legal effect of conveyance or transfer of 
the said flat or any right therein in favour of the bank, the undisputed 
factum that the said agreement to sale was deposited by the original 
borrowers herein so as to offer the said flat as security would 
tantamount to an equitable mortgage. Moreover, since at the time of 
availing the loan, the share certificate of ownership to the said Flat 
was yet to be issued, it could be said that the respondent no. 1 bank 
had all the documents to the said Flat that it could have at that time 
possibly taken in possession, and we even proceed on the footing that 
the respondent no. 1 bank might have undertaken all the necessary 
steps to assure itself that there were no other material documents 
to be taken possession of at the time of extending the loan. 
43.	 Thus, where ‘equitable mortgages’ have been created based on 
deposit of part-deeds or documents purporting title or evincing 
intention of parties to create an interest, all such deposits will be 
a valid mortgage in equity and the charge that might have been 
created prior in time will assume priority over any subsequent 
charges or mortgagors. However, since such a mortgage is an 
‘equitable mortgage’ any rights flowing from such mortgages are 
only of personal character and only rights in personam and as such 
will not operate against any strangers or subsequent incumbrancers 
1124
Supreme Court Reports
unaware of such equitable mortgage. This stems from the rule that 
equity acts only in personam. The very basis for creation of an 
‘equitable mortgage’ is the intention of parties alone, and as such 
any action or remedy can be directed only against the parties so 
involved. This is because, unlike a legal mortgage where a ‘charge’ is 
created directly on the property itself and the title or any proprietary 
interest therein is transferred to the lender thereby becoming a right 
enforceable in rem in respect to the property, in case of an ‘equitable 
mortgage’ no such charge is said to have been formally created on 
the property nor any transfer or conveyance of interest has said to 
occur. Rather on the contrary, the de jure title or ownership continues 
to vest with the original borrower and only the documents thereof is 
ordinarily retained by the lender and as such the right of the lender 
in such a situation is being enforced through the party having title 
over the said property alone i.e., the borrower and thus is only a 
right in personam. Edgar N. Durfee in The Lien or Equitable Theory 
of the Mortgage explaining the aforesaid stated that, in cases of 
equitable mortgage in the absence of any ‘conveyance’ or creation 
of ‘charge’, the money so advanced against the subject property is 
only in the form of a personal debt and hence a right in personam 
at best and the right of the lender to apportion or appropriate the 
subject property for repayment of loan only a right to take such an 
action rather than a right in the property itself.
44.	 ‘Equitable Mortgage’ being a right in personam will not affect 
successive incumbrances and will not be enforceable against 
successive mortgagees if the creation of such equitable charge 
was no disclosed to them. This is particularly because, ‘equitable 
mortgages’ are construed as ‘incomplete mortgages’ (as no actual 
charge is created nor any conveyance of title has taken place) and 
thus no person can be permitted to derive any advantage from any 
incomplete title who has on his own volition not done everything 
requisite to complete its title. If a first mortgagee voluntarily either 
leaves the title deeds with the mortgagor, or voluntarily accepts 
part-deeds and fails to either secure the rest or assure himself of 
any outstanding deeds or documents, then the charge of such first 
mortgagee must be postponed to any and all subsequent mortgagees, 
without notice of the charge of first mortgagee, because he due to 
his own gross negligence enabled the subsequent incumbrances. 
Thus, even if multiple equitable mortgages are created, the first 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1125
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
charge will have priority, unless in case of fraud or gross negligence, 
or a voluntary, distinct, and unjustifiable concurrence, on the part of 
the first mortgagee in either (i) retaining the remaining deeds or (ii) 
failure to take steps in putting everyone to notice, more particularly 
the subsequent incumbrancers about the first equitable mortgage. 
Where the first mortgagor has made bond fide inquiry for them and 
received a reasonable excuse for their non-delivery, he shall not be 
postponed to a subsequent equitable mortgage that may be created.
45.	 In India, the aforesaid has been recognized in Section 78 of the 
Act, 1882 which provides that where on account of any fraud, 
misrepresentation or gross neglect of a prior mortgagee, another 
person has been induced to advance money on the security of the 
mortgaged property, the prior mortgagee shall be postponed to the 
subsequent mortgagee. The said provision reads as under: -
78. Postponement of prior mortgagee. —
Where, through the fraud, misrepresentation or gross 
neglect of prior mortgagee, another person has been 
induced to advance money on the security of the mortgaged 
property, the prior mortgagee shall be postponed to the 
subsequent mortgagee.
46.	 It is in this very context, this Court in Suraj Lamps (supra) emphasized 
on the need for registration of documents so as to give publicity and 
public exposure to various transactions in respect of immovable 
properties and enable people to find out whether any particular 
property with which they are concerned, has been subjected to any 
legal obligation or liability and who is or are the person/s presently 
having right, title, and interest in the property. The relevant observation 
reads as under: -
Advantages of Registration
10. In the earlier order dated 15.5.2009, the objects and 
benefits of registration were explained and we extract 
them for ready reference: -
“The Registration Act, 1908, was enacted with 
the intention of providing orderliness, discipline 
and public notice in regard to transactions 
relating to immovable property and protection 
1126
Supreme Court Reports
from fraud and forgery of documents of transfer. 
This is achieved by requiring compulsory 
registration of certain types of documents and 
providing for consequences of non-registration. 
Section 17 of the Registration Act clearly provides 
that any document (other than testamentary 
instruments) which purports or operates to 
create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish 
whether in present or in future “any right, title 
or interest” whether vested or contingent of the 
value of Rs. 100 and upwards to or in immovable 
property.
Section 49 al the said Act provides that 
no document required by Section 17 to be 
registered shall, affect any immovable property 
comprised therein or received as evidence of 
any transaction affected such property, unless it 
has been registered. Registration of a document 
gives notice to the world that such a document 
has been executed.
Registration provides safety and security to transactions 
relating to immovable property, even if the document is 
lost or destroyed. It gives publicity and public exposure 
to documents thereby preventing forgeries and frauds 
in regard to transactions and execution of documents. 
Registration provides information to people who may 
deal with a property, as to the nature and extent of the 
rights which persons may have, affecting that property. 
In other words, it enables people to find out whether any 
particular property with which they are concerned, has been 
subjected to any legal obligation or liability and who is or 
are the person/s presently having right, title, and interest 
in the property. It gives solemnity of form and perpetuate 
documents which are of legal importance or relevance by 
recording them, where people may see the record and 
enquire and ascertain what the particulars are and as far 
as land is concerned what obligations exist with regard to 
them. It ensures that every person dealing with immovable 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1127
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
property can rely with confidence upon the statements 
contained in the registers (maintained under the said 
Act) as a full and complete account of all transactions by 
which the title to the property may be affected and secure 
extracts/copies duly certified.”
(Emphasis supplied)
47.	 In the present case, it appears from the materials on record, that 
when the loan was being advanced by the respondent no. 1 bank, a 
Memorandum of Equitable Mortgage recording transfer / deposit of 
the agreement to sale in respect of the said Flat was sought to be 
created, although the same has not been placed on record. There 
are no correspondences or communications between the respondent 
no. 1 bank or the original borrowers where the share certificate of 
ownership was demanded, even though the Bank was well aware 
that the conveyance of title where the subject Flat is situated only 
takes place through such certificate and not by the agreement of 
sale in terms of Section 11 of the Act, 1963 read with Section 4 of 
the Act, 1970. Moreover, it appears that no steps were taken by the 
respondent no. 1 bank to issue a public notice of equitable charge 
that was created in its favour, as discernible from the fact that when 
the appellant bank upon inquiry was informed by the concerned 
cooperative housing society that the said flat was not subject to any 
prior encumbrances or charge. In such a scenario, the equitable 
charge of the respondent no. 1 bank herein is liable to be postponed 
to the charge created in favour of the appellant bank herein in terms 
of Section 78 of the Act, 1882, and the impugned order of the High 
Court is liable to be set-aside on this ground alone.
v.	
Distinction between Mortgage by Deposit of Title Deeds 
under the English Law and under the Transfer Of Property 
Act, 1882.
48.	 At this stage we must also address ourselves on one another 
important aspect where the High Court grossly erred whilst passing 
the impugned judgment and order. As discussed in the foregoing 
paragraphs of this judgment, the original borrower whilst availing 
the loan facility from the respondent no. 1 and appellant, had 
deposited with them two unregistered agreement to sale, and another 
unregistered agreement to sale along with the share certificate of 
1128
Supreme Court Reports
ownership, respectively. Although both of the aforesaid transactions 
seek to create mortgage by deposit of documents or title, yet there lies 
a very fine but pertinent distinction between the two transactions. In 
respect of the loan advanced by the respondent no. 1 bank, only two 
unregistered agreements to sale were deposited which as discussed 
earlier do not purport any title as held in Suraj Lamps (supra) while 
with the appellant bank herein apart from one unregistered agreement 
to sale the share certificate of ownership had also been deposited 
which has the effect of conveyance of title. 
49.	 Under the English Law, whether the documents so deposited actually 
purport or transfer any title is immaterial for the purpose of creating 
an ‘equitable mortgage’ as long as the intention to do so is clearly 
discernible. The position in India however is quite different. This is 
because under the English Law, a mortgage created by deposit of 
title or documents is not construed as a legal mortgage and is only 
treated as an equitable mortgage. Whereas in India under the Act, 
1882, more particularly under Section 58 sub-section (f) a statutory 
recognition has been given to the mode of creation of mortgage by 
deposit of title deeds. Such a mortgage by deposit of title deeds is 
for all purposes a ‘legal mortgage’ and not an equitable mortgage. 
At the cost of repetition, the said provision is once again reproduced 
hereunder: -
“58. “Mortgage”, “mortgagor”, “mortgagee”, “mortgage-
money” and “mortgage-deed” defined.—
(a) A mortgage is the transfer of an interest in specific 
immoveable property for the purpose of securing the 
payment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of 
loan, an existing or future debt, or the performance of an 
engagement which may give rise to a pecuniary liability. 
The transferor is called a mortgagor, the transferee a 
mortgagee; the principal money and interest of which 
payment is secured for the time being arc called the 
mortgage-money, and the instrument (if any) by which the 
transfer is effected is called a mortgage-deed. 
(b) Simple mortgage.— Where, without delivering 
possession of the mortgaged property, the mortgagor 
binds himself personally to pay the mortgage-money, 
and agrees, expressly or impliedly, that, in the event of 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1129
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
his failing to pay according to his contract, the mortgagee 
shall have a right to cause the mortgaged property to be 
sold and the proceeds of sale to be applied, so far as may 
be necessary, in payment of the mortgage-money, the 
transaction is called a simple mortgage and the mortgagee 
a simple mortgagee. 
(c) Mortgage by conditional sale.— Where the mortgagor 
ostensibly sells the mortgaged property— on condition that 
on default of payment of the mortgage-money on a certain 
date the sale shall become absolute, or on condition that on 
such payment being made the sale shall become void, or 
on condition that on such payment being made the buyer 
shall transfer the property to the seller, the transaction is 
called a mortgage by conditional sale and the mortgagee 
a mortgagee by conditional sale: 
Provided that no such transaction shall be deemed to 
be a mortgage, unless the condition is embodied in the 
document which effects or purports to effect the sale.
(d) Usufructuary mortgage.— Where the mortgagor delivers 
possession or expressly or by implication binds himself 
to deliver possession of the mortgaged property to the 
mortgagee, and authorises him to retain such possession 
until payment of the mortgage-money, and to receive the 
rents and profits accruing from the property or any part 
of such rents and profits and to appropriate the same in 
lieu of interest, or in payment of the mortgage -money, 
or partly in lieu of interest or partly in payment of the 
mortgage-money, the transaction is called an usufructuary 
mortgage and the mortgagee an usufructuary mortgagee.
(e) English mortgage.— Where the mortgagor binds 
himself to re-pay the mortgage-money on a certain date, 
and transfers the mortgaged property absolutely to the 
mortgagee, but subject to a proviso that he will re-transfer 
it to the mortgagor upon payment of the mortgage-money 
as agreed, the transaction is called an English mortgage. 
(f) Mortgage by deposit of title-deeds.— Where a person in 
any of the following towns, namely, the towns of Calcutta, 
1130
Supreme Court Reports
Madras, and Bombay, and in any other town which the 
State Government concerned may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, delivers to a creditor 
or his agent documents of title to immoveable property, 
with intent to create a security thereon, the transaction is 
called a mortgage by deposit of title-deeds.
(g) Anomalous mortgage.—A mortgage which is not a 
simple mortgage, a mortgage by conditional sale, an 
usufructuary mortgage, an English mortgage or a mortgage 
by deposit of title-deeds within the meaning of this section 
is called an anomalous mortgage.”
50.	 Section 58 sub-section (a) stipulates the general rule that mortgage is 
“the transfer of an interest in specific immoveable” or as understood 
under the English Law as a “legal mortgage”. Section 58 sub-section(s) 
(b) to (g) further explains the different modes to create a mortgage 
under the Act, 1882. What is particularly important to note is the 
fact that, the subsequent sub-section(s) do not either expressly or 
impliedly stipulate that no transfer of interest is taking place where 
mortgage is created in terms of the other modes provided therein. 
There is also nothing in the entire Act, 1882 that mortgage created 
by one particular mode under Section 58 would be subservient to 
another. In such a scenario, any mortgage that happens to be created 
in terms of the Act, 1882 more particularly Section 58 would for all 
purposes be equal except in the consideration of priority of charge. 
Thus, while mortgage by deposit of title deeds under the English 
Law is an equitable mortgage and subservient to a legal mortgage, 
in India mortgage created by such deposit is not subservient to an 
equitable mortgage as such mortgage is in itself a legal mortgage. 
51.	 Deposit of title deeds is one of the many forms of mortgages 
whereunder there is a transfer of interest in specific immovable 
property for the purpose of securing payment of money advanced 
or to be advanced by way of loan. The three requisites for a valid 
mortgage are, (i) debt; (ii) deposit of title deed; and (iii) an intention 
that the deed shall operate as security for the debt. In other words, 
when the debtor deposits with the creditor title deeds of his property 
with an intent to create a security, the law implies a contract between 
the parties to create a mortgage and no registered instrument is 
required under Section 59 of the Act, 1882 as in other classes 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1131
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
of mortgage. It is essential to bear in mind that the essence of a 
mortgage by deposit of title deeds is the actual handing over by a 
borrower to the lender of documents of title to immovable property 
with the intention that those documents shall constitute a security 
which will enable the creditor ultimately to recover the money which 
he has lent. Whether there is an intention that the deed shall be 
security for the debt is a question of fact to be decided in each case 
on its own merits. The said fact will have to be decided just like any 
other fact based on legal presumptions, oral, documentary and/or 
circumstantial evidence. Normally, title deeds are delivered to the 
bank along with a covering letter indicating therein an intention of 
delivering title deed i.e. to create security for the present or future 
liability. In turn, bank gives a letter to the person delivering title 
deeds indicating acceptance of the documents and/or title deeds 
by way of security either for the outstanding dues or for the loan to 
be advanced. The banks, normally, maintain register of securities 
called Equitable Mortgage Register; wherein the entry of title deeds 
is taken in the form of memorandum signed by the Branch Manager 
alone, as a person accepting delivery of the documents as security. 
These formalities are done to establish three essential requisites 
of equitable mortgage, viz. (1) debit, (2) deposit of title deed 
and (iii) the intention that deed shall operate as security for 
the present or future debt. But if the parties choose to reduce the 
contract to writing, this implication of law is excluded by their express 
bargain, and the document will be the sole evidence of its terms. In 
such a case the deposit and the document both form integral parts 
of the transaction and are essential ingredients in the creation of 
the mortgage.
52.	 Thus, when the original borrowers deposited with the appellant bank 
herein, the share certificate of ownership to the said Flat, on that 
very day and date, a legal charge is said to have been created on 
the flat in favour of the appellant bank, whereas, when it comes to 
the respondent no. 1 bank no such charge on the flat was created, 
rather what was created was only an equitable mortgage, though prior 
in time. This distinction is particularly important, because even if the 
agreements to sale deposited with the respondent no. 1 bank were 
registered and thereby, giving public notice of their existence, still 
the appellant bank by virtue of possession of the actual title deeds to 
the said Flat in the form of the share certificate of ownership would 
1132
Supreme Court Reports
be accorded priority in charge for the sole reason that the charge 
created by it is a legal mortgage in terms of Section 58 of the Act, 
1882. At this stage, we may clarify that deposit of part-deeds of title 
would not constitute a mortgage in terms of Section 58 sub-section 
(e) of the Act, 1882 unlike English Law, because under the latter such 
deposit is only an equitable mortgage and thus, the strict rigidities 
may not be imposed or insisted upon whereas in India mortgage 
by deposit of title deeds is a legal mortgage which in effect would 
defeat any equitable mortgage, and thus, the requirement to deposit 
all title deeds would have to mandatorily be required except those 
deeds which despite best of efforts of the mortgagee could not have 
been deposited or known to be outstanding.
53.	 The underlying reason behind why an equitable mortgage would 
be subservient to a legal mortgage, even where proper notice 
was effectuated may be understood in many different ways, we 
have already discussed one of them in the foregoing paragraphs, 
particularly that the former does not create any de jure charge or right 
in the subject property and rather is only a right in personam, however, 
the short answer to the above is that equity cannot supplant the law 
and can only supplement it. Thus, where the law is unambiguous and 
clear, equity will always yield to the law. However, when it comes to 
equitable mortgages, we may rephrase the above to only say that 
equity will yield to the law only to the extent provided by the law. 
Thus, although the legal mortgage would have assumed priority 
in charge, yet an equitable mortgage may still be enforceable as 
secondary charge, provided the other considerations such as notice 
of such mortgage is fulfilled. 
54.	 This Court in K.J. Nathan v. S.V. Maruthi Rao reported in AIR 1965 
SC 430 has explained the fine distinction between an equitable 
mortgage as understood in the English law and the mortgage by 
deposit of title deed. K. Suba Rao J. (as His Lordship then was) 
speaking for Court observed as under: -
“Under this definition (referring to section 58(f) of the 
Transfer of Property Act) the essential requisites of 
mortgage by deposit of title deeds are, (i) debt), (deposit 
of title-deeds, and (iii) an intention that the deeds shall 
be security for the debt. Though such a mortgage is often 
described as an equitable mortgage, there is an essential 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1133
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
distinction between an equitable mortgage as understood 
in English Law and the mortgage by deposit of title deeds 
recognized under the Transfer of Property Act in India. In 
England an equitable mortgage can be created either, (1) 
by actual deposit of title deeds, in which case collateral 
evidence is admissible to show the meaning of the deposit 
and the extent of the security created, or (2) if there be no 
deposit of title deeds, then by a memorandum in writing, 
purporting to create a security for money advanced; 
See White and Tudor’s Leading Case in Equity, 9th Edition, 
Vol. II, at p. 77. In either case it does not operate as an 
actual conveyance though it is enforceable in equity; 
whereas under the Transfer of Property Act a mortgage by 
deposit of title deeds is one of the modes of creating a legal 
mortgage whereunder there will be transfer of interest in 
the property mortgaged to the mortgagee. This distinction 
will have to be borne in mind in appreciating the scope of 
the English decisions cited at the Bar. This distinction is 
also the basis for the view that for the purpose of priority 
it stood on the same footing as a mortgage by deed. […]”
(Emphasis supplied)
55.	 However, in order to obviate any confusion, we may clarify that 
the aforesaid observations in K.J. Nathan (supra) must not be 
understood to mean that equitable mortgage has no valid basis or is 
not recognized in toto in India. Any act of the parties that evinces a 
clear intention of the parties to create a mortgage though the same 
might not have been created in terms of Section 58 of the Act, 1882, 
may still be a valid charge in terms of Section 100 of the Act, 1882. 
The said provision reads as under: -
“100. Charges.—
Where immoveable property of one person is by act of 
parties or operation of law made security for the payment 
of money to another, and the transaction does not amount 
to a mortgage, the latter person is said to have a charge on 
the property; and all the provisions hereinbefore contained 
which apply to a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, 
apply to such charge.
1134
Supreme Court Reports
Nothing in this section applies to the charge of a trustee 
on the trust-property for expenses properly incurred in the 
execution of his trust, and, save as otherwise expressly 
provided by any law for the time being in force, no charge 
shall be enforced against any property in the hands of a 
person to whom such property has been transferred for 
consideration and without notice of the charge.”
56.	 Section 100 of the Act, 1882 provides that where a transaction does 
not amount to a mortgage i.e., not a mortgage in terms of Section 58 
of the said Act, the person to whom the immovable property is offered 
as a security would still nevertheless be said to have a “charge” in 
terms of the said provision, and that all provisions under the Act, 
1882 as applicable to simple mortgage envisaged under Section 58 
sub-section (b) of the said Act shall apply to such “charge” insofar 
as possible. The key distinction is that any mortgage which is not 
created in terms of Section 58 of the Act, 1882 i.e., all equitable 
mortgages are still nevertheless a “charge” to such property. The 
expression “and all the provisions hereinbefore contained which apply 
to a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to such charge” 
assumes significance as it is not suggestive that such charge would 
be deemed a simple mortgage, rather it only goes so far as to provide 
that the provisions that apply to simple mortgage will also apply to 
such “charges” so far as possible but by no means does it provide 
that such “charge” is to be treated as a simple mortgage in terms of 
Section 58 of the Act, 1882 i.e., as a legal mortgage. The last part 
of Section 100 of the Act, 1882 further statutorily recognizes the in 
personam nature of such “charge” and provides that they shall not 
be enforced against any person to whom such property or interest 
therein has been transferred i.e., to whom it has been mortgaged in 
terms of Section 58 of the said Act or any other bona-fide transferee 
who does not have notice of the said charge. Thus, what may be 
discerned is that, ‘equitable mortgages’ are very much recognized in 
India under the nomenclature of “charge” in terms of Section 100 of 
the Act, 1882, and the same will be enforceable as far as possible 
in terms of the procedure and provisions applicable to a simple 
mortgage except those without notice of such charge.
57.	 We are conscious of the decision of this Court in J.K. (Bombay) 
(P) Ltd. v. New Kaiser-I-Hind Spg. and Wvg. Co. Ltd. reported in 
1968 SCC OnLine SC 32 which held that an agreement to create 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1135
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
a mortgage only gives rise to perform such an agreement and 
does not amount to either a mortgage or a charge and the decision 
in Haryana Financial Corpn. v. Gurcharan Singh reported in 
(2014) 16 SCC 722 wherein it was held that since all provisions 
applicable to a simple mortgage shall, as far as possible, also apply 
to a charge, Section 59 of the Act, 1882 which requires a simple 
mortgage to be compulsorily be registered would also be applicable 
and as such the creation of a charge under Section 100 of the Act, 
1882 must be compulsorily registered. However, a close reading of 
the decision in J.K. (Bombay) (P) Ltd. (supra) will reveal that this 
Court never held that any agreement to mortgage will be incapable 
of creating a charge in terms of Section 100 of the Act, 1882, rather 
what was held is that only those agreement to mortgage where the 
intention to create a charge in praesenti is absent will be incapable 
of creating either a mortgage or a charge, but where such intention 
of parties is there, the same will definitely tantamount to a ‘charge’ 
under Section 100 of the Act, 1882 as held in ONGC Ltd. v. Official 
Liquidator reported in (2015) 5 SCC 300. Similarly, the decision 
of Haryana Financial Corpn (supra) holding that registration in 
terms of Section 59 of the Act, 1882 is mandatory in order to create 
a charge prima facie appears to be incorrect in view of an earlier 
decision of a larger bench of this Court in M.L. Abdul Jabbar Sahib 
v. M.V. Venkata Sastri & Sons reported in (1969) 1 SCC 573 which 
in clear terms held that the second part of Section 100 of the Act, 
1882  does not attract the provisions of Section 59 of the said Act 
and that a charge may be made without any writing and there is 
no provision of law which require that such an instrument must be 
attested or registered. We are also in agreement with the decision of 
M.L. Abdul Jabbar Sahib (supra) as to hold otherwise would result 
in absurd consequences which could not have been intended by the 
legislature. We say so because, if a charge can be made only by a 
registered instrument in accordance with Section 59 of the Act, 1882, 
then the subsequent transferee will always have notice of the said 
charge in view of Section 3 Explanation I which stipulates that “where 
any transaction relating to immoveable property is required by law 
to be and has been effected by a registered instrument, any person 
acquiring such property or any part of, or share or interest in, such 
property shall be deemed to have notice of such instrument as from 
the date of registration [...]”. This would effectively render the second 
part of Section 100 of the Act, 1882 which mandates requirement 
1136
Supreme Court Reports
of notice to all subsequent transferees before the enforcement of 
a ‘charge’ as otiose and redundant, as the moment when such 
instrument is registered, notice is deemed to have been made. The 
very idea behind stipulating the requirement of notice under Section 
100 of the Act, 1882 seems to be to save even those transactions 
which are not registered and do not amount to a mortgage yet in 
equity may still be enforceable provided the subsequent transferee 
has notice of such charge. We do not intend to dwell any further 
on the decisions of this Court in J.K. (Bombay) (P) Ltd. (supra) 
and Haryana Financial Corpn (supra) as the present case does 
not require examining whether the respondent no. 1 bank could be 
said to have an enforceable charge against the appellant bank, and 
even otherwise if an ‘equitable mortgage’ cannot be construed as 
a ‘charge’ in terms of Section 100 of the Act, 1882, the former may 
still be permitted to be enforceable in the extant of equity in the 
peculiar facts of each case. This is because the enforcement of an 
‘equitable mortgage’ being a by-product of the doctrine of equity is 
purely a matter of discretion that a court of conscience may grant 
keeping in mind the principles of fair-play, good conscience and 
justice. Where any ‘equitable mortgage’ is found to be unenforceable, 
the same though neither a ‘legal mortgage’ nor a ‘charge’ may still 
nevertheless entitle a lender to seek other reliefs such as specific 
performance of the contract or a suit for recovery on the strength of 
the ab inito intention of the parties to create a security evident from 
such ‘equitable mortgage’. 
58.	 We are conscious of the decision of this Court in Kedar Lal v. Hari 
Lal reported in AIR 1952 SC 47 wherein it was held that the whole 
of law of mortgage in India, including the law of contribution arising 
out of a transaction of mortgage, is now statutory and is embodied 
in the Act, 1882 read with the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 and that 
the courts cannot travel beyond these provisions. The relevant 
observations read as under: -
“27. So far as Section 43 is concerned, I am not prepared 
to apply it unless Sections 82 and 92 can be excluded. Both 
Sections 43 and 82 deal with the question of contribution. 
Section 43 is a provision of the Contract Act dealing with 
contracts generally. Section 82 applies to mortgages. As 
the right to contribution here arises out of a mortgage, I 
am clear that Section 82 must exclude Section 43 because 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1137
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
when there is a general law and a special law dealing with 
a particular matter, the special excludes the general. In 
my opinion, the whole law of mortgage in India, including 
the law of contribution arising out of a transaction of 
mortgage, is now statutory and is embodied in the Transfer 
of Property Act read with the Civil Procedure Code. I am 
clear we cannot travel beyond these statutory provisions.”
59.	 However, a close reading of the aforesaid paragraph of Kedar Lal 
(supra) would reveal that the observations were made in light of the 
question whether Section 43 of the Indian Contract Act, 1882 which 
deals with right to contribution would be applicable to such a right 
which is arising out of a mortgage to the exclusion of Section 82 of 
the Act, 1882 which deals with mortgages. It was in this context this 
Court held that when it comes to mortgages it will not be permissible 
to travel beyond the scheme of Act, 1882 and venture into the 
provisions contained in other laws. 
60.	 However, this by no stretch means that the concept of equitable 
mortgage has no place in the Indian jurisprudence. The concept 
of equitable mortgage is purely a creation and by-product of the 
doctrine of equity, and thus, the absence of any specific provision 
under the Act, 1882 providing for such a mortgage will not run to the 
detriment of something which is essentially designed to ensure that 
principles of fair-play, good conscience and justice endure. There is 
no decision which either specifically excludes or outrightly rejects the 
application of this doctrine. Rather, the subsequent decision of this 
Court in K.J. Nathan (supra) it was specifically stated that although 
the concept of equitable mortgage as evolved under the English Law 
cannot be considered to be a rule of law, which as also discussed 
by us in the foregoing paragraphs is by-product of doctrine of equity 
and not the law of the land, yet they may serve as a guide. The 
relevant observations read as under: -
10. The foregoing discussion may be summarized thus : 
Under the Transfer of Property Act a mortgage by deposit 
of title deeds is one of the forms of mortgages whereunder 
there is a transfer of interest in specific immovable property 
for the purpose of securing payment of money advanced 
or to be advanced by way of loan. Therefore, such a 
mortgage of property takes effect against a mortgage deed 
1138
Supreme Court Reports
subsequently executed and registered in respect of the 
same property. The three requisites for such a mortgage 
are, (i) debt, (ii) deposit of title deed; and (iii) an intention 
that the deeds shall be security for the debt. Whether 
there is an intention that the deeds shall be security for 
the debt is a question of fact in each case. The said 
fact will have to be decided just like any other fact on 
presumptions and on oral, documentary or circumstantial 
evidence. There is no presumption of law that the mere 
deposit of title deeds constitutes a mortgage, for no such 
presumption has been laid down either in the Evidence 
Act or in the Transfer of Property Act. But a court may 
presume under Section 114 of the Evidence Act that under 
certain circumstances a loan and a deposit of title deeds 
constitute a mortgage. But that is really an inference as 
to the existence of one fact from the existence of some 
other fact or facts. Nor the fact that at the time the title 
deeds were deposited there was an intention to execute a 
mortgage deed in itself negatives, or is inconsistent with, 
the intention to create a mortgage by deposit of title deeds 
to be in force till the mortgage deed was executed. The 
decisions of English courts making a distinction between 
the debt preceding the deposit and that following it can at 
best be only a guide; but the said distinction itself cannot 
be considered to be a rule of law for application under 
all circumstances. Physical delivery of documents by the 
debtor to the creditor is not the only mode of deposit. 
There may be a constructive deposit. A court will have 
to ascertain in each case whether in substance there is 
a delivery of title deeds by the debtor to the creditor. If 
the creditor was already in possession of the titledeeds, 
it would be hypertechnical to insist upon the formality of 
the creditor delivering the title deeds to the debtor and the 
debtor redelivering them to the creditor. What would be 
necessary in those circumstances is whether the parties 
agreed to treat the documents in the possession of the 
creditor or his agent as delivery to him for the purpose of 
the transaction.”
(Emphasis supplied)
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1139
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
61.	 Thus, in such a situation where a transaction does not amount to 
a mortgage but nevertheless can be construed as a preliminary 
step towards the preparation of a mortgage which will be security 
thereafter with nothing else done for conveyance or transfer of title 
or interest, there three recourses may be available to the lender: -
(i)	
He may simply claim that the transaction amounts to an equitable 
mortgage as it was for the purpose of creating a present or 
immediate security which a court of equity ought to consider; or
(ii)	
He may claim that there has been a sufficient part performance 
of the contract, with attending circumstances which a court ought 
to relieve by permitting the lender to ‘perfect its mortgage’ i.e., 
to take further steps for the transfer of conveyance of title or 
interest in order to create a mortgage; or
(iii)	 He may bring a suit for recovery of money and base his claim 
simply on the ab initio intention of the parties to create a 
security in the first place and the resultant part-performance of 
the contract insofar as the loan was extended based on such 
promise or consideration of security.
62.	 Before we close this judgment, we must look into the observations 
made by the High Court in para 8 of its impugned order. In para 8 
the High Court has recorded that at the time of sanction and grant 
of the loan by the appellant-bank herein i.e. sometime in November, 
1998 the flat in question was in custodia legis of the court receiver 
appointed in the year 1994. What weighed with the High Court was 
the submission canvassed on behalf of the Central Bank that the 
validity of the mortgaged flat in question in favour of the appellant 
bank was also questionable. The reason why the High Court said 
so is because both the agreements are unregistered. According to 
the learned counsel appearing for the Central Bank, the agreement 
which appellant bank accepted was also unregistered. Then both 
the banks are sailing in the same boat. However, what seems to 
have been overlooked by the Central Bank is the fact that when the 
borrowers approached the appellant bank for loan they had a valid 
title deed i.e., the original share certificate issued by the society. The 
issuance of the original share certificate was also confirmed by the 
society vide letter dated 13.11.1998, which forms a part of the record.
63.	 The original share certificate which was produced before the 
appellant-bank as availed Title deed assumes significance in view 
1140
Supreme Court Reports
of the provisions of Section 11 of the Act 1963, more particularly, 
sub-section (1) of Section 11 of Act which reads thus: -
“11. Promoter to convey title, etc., and execute 
documents, according to agreement.— (1) A promoter 
shall take all necessary steps to complete his title and 
convey, to the organisation of persons, who take flats, 
which is registered either as a co-operative society or 
as a company as aforesaid, or to an association flat-
takers or apartment owners his right, title and interest in 
the land and building, and execute all relevant documents 
therefor in accordance with the agreement executed 
under Section 4 and if no period for the execution of 
the conveyance is agreed upon, he shall execute the 
conveyance within the prescribed period and also deliver 
all documents of title relating to the property which may 
be in his possession or power.”
(Emphasis supplied)
64.	 In para 8 of the impugned judgment, the High Court has recorded 
that the appellant bank herein had sought to rely upon the original 
share certificate issued by the Society as a valid piece of title deed. 
However, the High Court got carried away by the fact that the first 
charge was that of the Central Bank and not of the appellant bank, 
and failed to notice the distinction that exists between an ‘equitable 
mortgage’ and a ‘legal mortgage’.
65.	 The proposition of law is that though the transaction evidenced by the 
prior unregistered document is valid in itself, yet any title or interest 
created by it is liable to be defeated under the rule of priority by a 
valid later and legal sale or mortgage evidenced by a duly registered 
document. The reason is, otherwise, no effect can be given to the 
rule which implies that the later registered title is intended to prevail 
against an earlier unregistered title. No weight can, therefore, be 
attached to the contention that by a valid unregistered agreement of 
sale, the vendor’s title is exhausted, he has, afterwards, nothing to sell, 
and the later registered sale deed gives nothing to the predecessor. 
The fallacy in the contention lies in ignoring the reason of the rule, 
namely that as between the registered and unregistered transactions, 
the registered transaction creates the dominant right or title.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1141
The Cosmos Co. Operative Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India & Ors.
E.	
CONCLUSION
66.	 In view of the aforesaid, we have reached the conclusion that the 
impugned order passed by the High Court is not correct and it 
deserves to be set aside.
67.	 In the result the appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. The 
impugned Order passed by the High Court is hereby set aside. Since, 
the respondent no. 1 had failed in bringing the factum of its ‘equitable 
mortgage’ to the notice of the appellant bank, the respondent no. 1 
bank is not entitled to enforce the same qua the recovery proceeds 
of the appellant bank herein.
68.	 We are informed that an amount of Rs. 51 lakh is lying deposited 
with the DRT maintained in an escrow account. The same now be 
disbursed along with interest in favour of the appellant bank.
69.	 We direct the Registry to send one copy each of this judgment to 
all the High Courts with further request to each of the High Courts 
to forward the judgment to the DRTs and DRAT benches. 
70.	 Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Aishani Narain, Hony. Associate Editor 
(Verified by: Ms. Liz Mathew, Sr. Adv.)