[2025] 8 S.C.R. 362 : 2025 INSC 923
Delhi Pollution Control Committee 
v. 
Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 757-760 of 2013)
04 August 2025
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and Manoj Misra, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the regulatory boards can, in exercise of powers u/s.33A 
of the Water Act and s.31A of the Air Act, impose and collect as 
restitutionary and compensatory damages fixed sums of monies 
or require furnishing bank guarantees as an ex-ante measure 
towards potential environmental damage.
Headnotes†
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 – 
s.33A – Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 – 
s.31A – The Division Bench of the High Court held that 
DPCC (regulatory body/Board) is not empowered to levy 
compensatory damages in exercise of powers u/s.33A of the 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and 
s.31A of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 
on the ground that such an action amounts to imposition of 
penalty provided for in Chapters VII and VI of the respective 
Acts, and as such, procedure contemplated thereunder will 
be the only method for imposing and collecting compensatory 
damage – Correctness: 
Held: 1. Having considered the principles that governing 
environmental laws and on interpretation of ss.33A and 31A 
of the Water and Air Acts, this Court is of the opinion that the 
Division Bench of the High Court was not correct in restrictively 
reading powers of the Boards – The environmental regulators, the 
Pollution Control Boards exercising powers under the Water and 
Air Acts, can impose and collect restitutionary or compensatory 
damages in the form of fixed sum of monies or require furnishing 
of bank guarantees as an ex-ante measure to prevent potential 
environmental damage – These powers are incidental and ancillary 
to the empowerment u/ss.33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts – 
The powers must be exercised as per procedure laid down by 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
363
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
subordinate legislation incorporating necessary principles of natural 
justice, transparency and certainty. [Paras 2, 28]
2. The Board’s powers u/s.33A of the Water Act and s.31A of the Air 
Act have to be read in light of the legal position on the application 
of Polluter Pays principle as formulated and explained – This means 
that State Board cannot impose environmental damages in case of 
every contravention or offence under the Water Act and Air Act – 
It is only when the State Board has made a determination that 
some form of environmental damage or harm has been caused 
by the erring entity, or the same is so imminent, that the State 
Board must initiate action u/s.33A of the Water Act and s.31A of 
the Air Act. [Para 30]
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 – s.33A – 
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 – s.31A – 
Board’s responsibility to choose appropriate course of action:
Held: Given their broad statutory mandate and the significant duty 
towards public health and environmental protection the Boards 
must have the power and distinction to decide the appropriate 
action against a polluting entity – It is essential that the Boards 
function effectively and efficiently by adopting such measures as is 
necessary in a given situation – The Boards can decide whether a 
polluting entity needs to be punished by imposition of penalty or if 
the situation demands immediate restoration of the environmental 
damage by the polluter or both. [Para 32]
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 – 
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 – 2024 
amendments – Decriminalisation and Adjudicatory Officer:
Held: There is no conflict between the powers of the State Boards 
to direct payment of environmental damages u/ss.33A and 31A 
of the Water and Air Acts and the powers of the Adjudicating 
Officer to impose penalties under Chapter VII of the Water Act 
and Chapter VI of the Air Act – The decriminalization of offences 
under these Chapters has not removed the punitive nature of 
actions that can be taken under them – There remains a clear 
distinction between the nature of directions that the State Boards 
can issue u/ss.33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts for payment 
of environmental damage and the determination by Adjudicating 
Officers – The former is compensatory in nature and will be resorted 
to when remedial measures are being undertaken to restore the 
364
Supreme Court Reports
degraded environment or pollution caused – The latter is a penalty 
for an offence under the law and is imposed with the objective of 
punishing the offender. [Para 31]
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 – s.33A – 
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 – s.31A – 
Power of Boards to direct the payment of environmental 
damages – Powers must be guided by transparency and 
non-arbitrariness:
Held: The Boards have the power to direct the payment of 
environmental damages, this Court makes it clear that this power 
must always be guided by two overarching principles – First, 
that the power cannot be exercised in an arbitrary manner; and 
second, the process of exercising this power must be infused with 
transparency. [Para 33]
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 – 
s.17 – Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 – 
s.17 – Existing Legal Regime for Pollution Control in India – 
discussed. [Paras 9 and 10]
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 – s.33A – 
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 – s.31A – 
Insertion of ss.33A & 31A in Water and Air Acts – Discussed. 
[Paras 11 to 15 ]
Constitution of India – Part IV A and Arts. 48A, 51A – 
Interpretation of and for Environmental Institutions – 
Discussed. [Paras 16-17]
Environment – Pollution control – Duty to Restitute v. Power 
to Punish and Penalise – Discussed. [Paras 18 to 26]
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 – 
Chapters VII – Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 
1981 – Chapters VI – Environmental damage – Distinction 
between restitution and punitive action:
Held: There is a distinction between a direction for payment of 
restitutionary and compensatory damages as a remedial measure 
for environmental damage or as an ex-ante measure towards 
potential environmental damage on the one hand; and a punitive 
action of fine or imprisonment for violations under Chapters VII of 
the Water Act and VI of the Air Act on the other hand – If directions 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
365
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
in furtherance of restitutionary and compensatory measures are 
issued, these are not to be considered as punitive in nature – 
Punitive action can only be taken through the procedure prescribed 
in the statute for example under chapters VII and VI of the Water 
and Air Acts respectively. [Paras 27(I)(II)]
Environmental Law – Indian environmental law assimilation 
of Principle of Polluter Pays:
Held: Indian environmental law has assimilated the principle of 
Polluter Pays and there is also a statutory incorporation of this 
principle in our laws – The invocation of this principle is triggered 
in the situations – i) when an established threshold or prescribed 
requirement is exceeded or breached, and it does result in 
environmental damage, ii) when an established threshold or 
prescribed requirement is not exceeded or breached, nevertheless 
the act in question results in environmental damage and also iii) 
when a potential risk or a likely adverse impact to the environment 
is anticipated, irrespective of whether or not prescribed thresholds 
or requirements are exceeded or breached. [Para 27(III)]
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 – s.33A – 
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 – s.31A – 
Duty of Environmental regulators:
Held: Environmental regulators have a compelling duty to adopt 
and apply preventive measures irrespective of actual environmental 
damage – Ex-ante action shall be taken by these regulators and 
for this purpose a certain measure in exercise of powers u/ss.33A 
and 31A of the Water and Air Acts is necessary. [Para 27(IV)]
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 – s.33A – 
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 – s.31A – 
Environment Protection Act – s.5 – Powers of Board under 
Environment Protection Act and Water and Air Acts:
Held: The powers of the Boards u/ss.33A and 31A of the Water and 
Air Acts are identical to that of s.5 of the Environment Protection 
Act – Under Section 5, the Central Government or its delegate 
has the power to issue directions to the polluting industry to pay 
certain amounts and utilise the said fund for carrying out remedial 
measures – The Boards are empowered to take similar actions  
u/ss.33A and 31A of the Acts. [Para 27(V)]
366
Supreme Court Reports
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 – s.33A – 
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 – s.31A – 
Directions issued by the Supreme Court:
Held: (a) The judgement and order dated 23.01.2012, passed by 
the Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi is set aside to the 
extent of declaration of law but direct that the show cause notices 
that have been set aside by the High Court shall not be revived; 
(b) This Court directs that the Pollution Control Boards can impose 
and collect as restitutionary and compensatory damages fixed 
sums of monies or require furnishing bank guarantees as an ex-
ante measure towards potential environmental damage in exercise 
of powers u/ss. 33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts; (c) It is 
further directed that the power to impose or collect restitutionary 
or compensatory damages or the requirement to furnish bank 
guarantees as an ex-ante measure u/ss. 33A and 31A of the Water 
and Air Acts shall be enforced only after detailing the principle and 
procedure incorporating basic principles of natural justice in the 
subordinate legislation. [Para 39]
Case Law Cited
MC Mehta v. Kamal Nath [2000] Supp. 1 SCR 389 : (2000) 6 
SCC 213; Vellore Citizens’ Welfare Forum v. Union of India [1996] 
Supp. 5 SCR 241 : (1996) 5 SCC 647; Research Foundation for 
Science (18) v. Union of India [2005] 1 SCR 115 : (2005) 13 SCC 
186; Deepak Nitrite Ltd. v. State of Gujarat [2004] Supp. 2 SCR 
49 : (2004) 6 SCC 402; T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad, In Re v. 
Union of India [2024] 3 SCR 187 : (2025) 2 SCC 641; Bengaluru 
Development Authority v. Sudhakar Hegde [2020] 5 SCR 755 : 
(2020) 15 SCC 63 – relied on. 
State of MP v. Centre for Environment Protection Research & 
Development [2020] 12 SCR 1139 : (2020) 9 SCC 781; Chandra 
Kishore Jha v. Mahavir Prasad & Ors. [1999] Supp. 2 SCR 754 : 
(1999) 8 SCC 266; Indian Council for Enviro-Legal Action v. 
Union of India [1996] 2 SCR 503 : (1996) 3 SCC 212; Bengaluru 
Development Authority v. Sudhakar Hegde [2020] 5 SCR 755 : 
(2020) 15 SCC 63 – referred to.
Splendor Landbase Ltd. v. DPCC, 2012 (195) DLT 177; State 
Pollution Control Board, Odisha v. M/s Swastik Ispat Pvt Ltd and 
Others, 2014 SCC OnLine NGT 13 – referred to.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
367
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
List of Acts
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981; Constitution of 
India; Environment (Protection) Act 1986.
List of Keywords
Restitutionary and compensatory damages; Bank guarantees as 
an ex-ante measure; Potential environmental damage; Violation 
of the environmental norms; Power of Boards; Principle of Natural 
Justice in the subordinate legislation; Polluter Pays principle; 
Broad statutory mandate; Appropriate action against a polluting 
entity; Payment of environmental damages; Pollution control; 
Section 33A of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 
1974; Section 31A of Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1981; Environmental regulators; Punitive action; Remedial 
measure; Power to issue directions to the polluting industry; 
Decriminalization of offences; Powers of the Adjudicating 
Officer to impose penalties; Remedial jurisprudence; Injunctory, 
mandatory and compensatory remedies; Restitutionary directives; 
Fundamental rights of citizens; Environmental wrongs; Institutional 
foresight; Institutional memory; Institutional integrity; Institutional 
transparency and accountability; Independent and objective 
decisions.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 757-760 
of 2013
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.01.2012 of the HIGH 
COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI in LPA No(s). 709, 710, 866 
and 867 of 2011 
With
Civil Appeal No(s). 1977-2011 of 2013
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Ninad Laud, Saurabh Kulkarni, Ms. Rashika Narain, Ms. Ishani 
Shekhar, Dcosta Ivo Manuel Simon, Pradeep Misra, Daleep 
Dhyani, Suraj Singh.
368
Supreme Court Reports
Advs. for the Respondents:
S. D. Sanjay, Satya Darshi Sanjay, A.S.Gs., Pinaki Mishra, 
B.b.gupta, Ms. Swarupma Chaturvedi, Kailash Vashudev, Pravin 
Bahadur, Kishan Rawat, Ms. Rubi Singh Ahuja, Ms. Kanika Gomber, 
Rajan Narain, Umesh Kumar Khaitan, Ajit Warrier, Angad Kochhar, 
S. S. Shroff, Gurmeet Singh Makker, Ms. Ruchi Kohli, Chinmayee 
Chandra, Chitvan Singhal, Mohit D. Ram, Ms. Nayan Gupta, Mrs. 
Priya Puri, Navin Prakash, Ms. Srishti Prakash, Ms. Swarupama 
Chaturvedi, Ms. Ruchi Kohli, Ms. Chinmayee Chandra, Chitvan 
Singhal, Amit Sharma V, Dr. N. Visakamurthy, Avijit Roy.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Contents*
1.
Introduction ..................................................................................
2
2.
Facts ............................................................................................
3
3.
Single Judge’s Judgement and Orders .......................................
4
4.
Impugned Order of the Division Bench .......................................
6
5.
Submissions .................................................................................
8
6.
Issue .............................................................................................
11
7.
Existing Legal Regime for Pollution Control in India ...................
12
8.
Insertion of Sections 33A & 31A in Water and Air Acts ...............
14
9.
Interpretation of and for Environmental Institutions .....................
18
10.
Duty to Restitute v. Power to Punish and Penalise .....................
20
11.
Principles ......................................................................................
26
A.	 Board’s Responsibility to Choose Appropriate Course of 
Action ....................................................................................
32
B.	 Powers Must Be Guided by Transparency and  
Non-Arbitrariness ..................................................................
33
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
369
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
1.	
Introduction.
1.	
The Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC)1 is in appeal against 
the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court holding that 
it is not empowered to levy compensatory damages in exercise of 
powers under Section 33A of the Water (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Section 31A of the Air (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 19812 on the ground that such an action 
amounts to imposition of penalty provided for in Chapters VII and 
VI of the respective Acts, and as such, procedure contemplated 
thereunder will be the only method for imposing and collecting 
compensatory damage.
2.	
Having considered the principles that govern Indian environmental 
laws, we have held that the environmental regulators, the Pollution 
Control Boards exercising powers under the Water and Air Acts, can 
impose and collect restitutionary or compensatory damages in the 
form of fixed sum of monies or require furnishing of bank guarantees 
as an ex-ante measure to prevent potential environmental damage. 
These powers are incidental and ancillary to the empowerment under 
Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts. At the same time, 
we have directed that the powers must be exercised as per procedure 
laid down by subordinate legislation incorporating necessary principles 
of natural justice, transparency and certainty. 
2.	
Facts.
3.	
It is the case of the Delhi Pollution Control Committee that pursuant 
to the directions of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MoEFCC) to take appropriate action against certain entities 
operating in violation of the environmental norms, show cause notices 
were issued for violation of Section 25 of the Water Act and Sections 21 
and 22 of the Air Act. These entities were either residential complexes, 
commercial complexes or shopping malls. The show cause notices 
were issued on the ground that they proceeded with construction and 
in fact, were operating without obtaining the mandatory “consent to 
1	
DPCC is a regulatory body in the National Capital Territory of Delhi, established as a ‘State Board’. These 
Boards are constituted under section 4 of the Water Act and under section 4 or section 5 of the Air Act, 
and exercise powers granted under section 33A of the Water Act and section 31A of the Air Act. Our 
interpretation of section 33A and 31A herein will apply to any such body established under said Acts. 
2	
Hereinafter referred to as the Water Act and Air Act respectively.
370
Supreme Court Reports
establish” and “consent to operate” under Section 25 of the Water 
Act and Section 21 of the Air Act. The show cause notices were 
challenged by way of 38 writ petitions before the Delhi High Court. 
The challenge culminated in the judgement of a single judge dated 
30.09.2010 in the case of Splendor Landbase Ltd. v. DPCC3. The 
learned single judge considered the question as to whether a State 
Board can levy environmental damages in the form of fixed sums of 
money or require an entity to furnish a bank guarantee as a condition 
for grant of consent under Section 33A of Water Act and/or Section 
31A of Air Act. Similar writ petitions were considered and decided by 
another single judge bench in Bharti Realty Ltd. v. DPCC and Anush 
Finlease and Construction v. DPCC on 20.07.2011 and 15.09.2011 
and were disposed of in terms of the decision in Splendor Landbase 
Ltd. v. DPCC. The reasoning adopted in the judgement and orders 
passed by the Single Judges are as follows. 
3.	
Single Judge’s Judgement and Orders.
4.	
In Splendor Landbase Ltd. v. DPCC4, the ld. single judge by his 
judgement dated 30.09.2010 dealt with two major issues – firstly, 
whether proprietors of properties over 20,000 square meters are 
required to obtain consent to establish and consent to operate under 
Water Act and Air Act independently, despite obtaining EIA Clearance 
from the Ministry; and secondly, whether Boards can levy penalties, 
fines, environmental damages in form of fixed sums of monies or call 
for bank guaranties as a condition to grant consent under Water and 
Air Acts? While the first question was answered in the affirmative, 
the second was answered in the negative. 
4.1	 It was held that the power to levy penalty is in the nature of a 
penal power and as such a penalty cannot be imposed without 
there being an enabling statutory power. For this reason, the 
single judge held that Board has no power to levy penalty 
or damage, even on the basis of the general powers under 
Sections 31A or 33A of the Acts. The learned Judge criticized 
the monetary demand as a pre-condition for grant of consent 
under the Acts on the ground that it has no statutory backing. 
3	
2012 (195) DLT 177.
4	
Hereinafter referred to as Splendor.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
371
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
4.2	 In the other batch of cases i.e. in Bharti Realty Ltd. v. DPCC 
and Anush Finlease and Construction Ltd. v. DPCC, decided 
on 12.07.2011 and 15.09.2011, the learned Single Judge was 
constrained to enquire into the matter in detail as writ appeals 
against the judgement in Splendor were already pending before 
a Division Bench. Therefore, the Single Judge allowed the writ 
petitions following the decision in Splendor and holding that 
the Board has no power to impose and collect compensatory 
damages. In these cases, the learned Judge also directed refund 
of the amounts collected. However, no interest was granted 
to the respondents as they chose to comply with the demand 
instead of challenging the same at the relevant point in time. 
4.	
Impugned Order of the Division Bench.
5.	
The decisions of the single judges were challenged by the appellant 
before the Division Bench of the High Court. By the judgement 
impugned before us, the Division Bench upheld the findings of the 
Single Judge in Splendor that the power to issue directions under 
Sections 33A and 31A under the two Acts does not confer the power to 
levy ‘penalty’. The High Court further observed that under Chapter VII 
and Chapter VI of the Water and Air Acts penalties can be levied only 
by courts and that too after taking cognizance of offences specified 
under the two Acts. Provided that the procedure so prescribed under 
the statute has to be followed mandatorily, the Division Bench held 
that the appellant would not be entitled to impose compensation or 
direct deposit of bank guarantees. The relevant portion of the Division 
Bench of the High Court is as follows –
“37. We concur with the reasoning of the learned Single 
Judge in paras 58 to 64 of the impugned decision and thus 
do not elaborate any further, but would additionally highlight 
that, the power to issue directions under Section 33A of 
the Water Act and the power to issue directions under 
Section 31A of the Air Act, on their plain language, does 
not confer the power to levy any penalty. We would further 
highlight that under Chapter VII of the Water Act and under 
Chapter VI of the Air Act penalties and procedure to levy the 
same have been set out. A perusal of the provisions under 
the Water Act would reveal that penalties can be levied 
as per procedure prescribed and only Courts can take 
372
Supreme Court Reports
cognizance of offences under the Act and levy penalties, 
whether by way of imprisonment or fine. Similar is the 
position under the Air Act. The legislature having enacted 
specific provisions for levy of penalties and procedures to 
be followed has specifically made the offences cognizable 
by Courts and the power to levy penalties under both Acts 
has been vested in the Courts. The role of the Pollution 
Control Boards is to initiate proceedings before the Court 
of Competent jurisdiction and no more. 
40. The language of Sub-Section 5 of Section 25 of the 
Water Act makes it plain clear that the only solution to 
a situation of a building being constructed to establish 
an industry, operation or process without obtaining prior 
consent of the State Pollution Control Board is the power 
of the Board to serve upon the person concerned a notice 
imposing such conditions as might have been imposed 
on an application, seeking prior consent and we find that 
the learned Single Judge has correctly so opined and has 
rightly issued the direction that the only way out, pertaining 
to the Water Act is to permit DPCC to inspect the shopping 
malls and the shopping commercial complexes and if it is 
found that pertaining to discharge of sewage from these 
buildings any steps are required to prevent water pollution 
DPCC would be authorized to issue notices requiring the 
owner of the building to take steps in terms of the notice 
issued. Pertaining to the Air Act notwithstanding there being 
no similar provision, but the concept of a post decisional 
hearing may be made applicable with the modification that 
no hearing would be required inasmuch as there is no 
decision, but DPCC should be empowered to inspect the 
shopping malls and the shopping, commercial complexes 
and pertaining to air pollution, if the owners of the buildings 
do not take corrective action, DPCC would always have 
the power to file criminal complaints before the Courts of 
Competent Jurisdiction, which Courts would alone have 
the power to impose fine and additionally impose sentence 
of imprisonment upon the offending persons. 
42. In a few cases, we find that since DPCC was not 
permitting the buildings to be occupied, under protest, the 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
373
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
owners paid the penalty to DPCC and have immediately 
approached the Court seeking refund and the same has 
been ordered for the reason neither under the Water Act 
nor under the Air Act there exists any power in DPCC 
to levy penalty or impose conditions of furnishing bank 
guarantee. The decision of the learned Single Judge is 
correct in directing the bank guarantees to be discharged 
and penalties levied to be refunded for the reason the 
said act of DPCC is ultra-vires its power under the two 
statutes and the levy of penalty is without any authority 
of law. In the decision reported as 1997 [5] SCC 535 
Mafatlal Industries Ltd. & Ors. Vs UOI & Ors., under writ 
jurisdiction refund can be directed where the levy is without 
jurisdiction and the same would include a penalty levied 
without any jurisdiction. In the instant case the penalty 
levied is unconstitutional being not sanctioned by any 
power vested in DPCC either under the Water Act or the 
Air Act. The impugned decisions where penalty levied has 
been directed to be refunded are upheld.”
5.	
Submissions.
6.	
Mr. Pradeep Mishra appearing on behalf of the appellant DPCC 
submitted that the High Court erred in holding that the State Boards 
are not empowered to impose environmental damages under Sections 
33A and 31A of Water and Air Acts. He has argued that the application 
of the principle of Polluter Pays is distinct from the requirement of 
authority of law to impose tax or penalty. 
7.	
We have requested Mr. Ninad Laud, learned counsel to assist us in 
the matter. He has gracefully accepted and has eminently assisted 
the Court. He has submitted# that as per broad scheme of the Acts 
and also the statement of objects and reasons, State Boards are 
empowered to act on their own while enforcing Sections 25 and 
26 and also while issuing directions under Sections 33A and 31A. 
However, when faced with non-compliances, recourse to judicial 
process is contemplated under Sections 49 and 43 of Water and 
Air Acts respectively. Further, neither Rule 34 of Water (Prevention 
# Ed. Note: “We have requested Mr. Ninad Laud, learned counsel to assist us in the matter. He has gracefully 
accepted and has eminently assisted the Court. He has submitted” instead of “On behalf of the respondents, 
Mr. Ninad Laud has submitted” in terms of subsequent corrigendum.
374
Supreme Court Reports
& Control of Pollution) Rules 1975 nor Rule 20A of Air (Prevention 
& Control of Pollution) Rules 1983, while providing a mechanism 
to administer Section 33A and Section 31A, contemplate monetary 
penalties. Countering the submission of Mr. Pradeep Misra on the 
principle of Polluter Pays to encourage reading the power to impose 
and collect environmental damages under Sections 33A and 31A of the 
respective Acts, he would submit such an approach is impermissible 
as the said power is specifically and separately provided under 
Chapters VII and VI therein. Relying on the decision of this Court in 
MC Mehta v. Kamal Nath5, he would submit, after considering the 
scheme of penal provisions under Water Act, Air Act and Environment 
(Protection) Act 1986, the Supreme Court held that penalties under 
the Acts befall a person only after finding of guilt upon trial by a court 
of law. Referring to the legitimacy of State Board’s action demanding 
bank guarantees to secure compliance with conditions, he would 
submit that no penalty, other than that contemplated in the statute or 
statutory scheme can be imposed.6 We have also heard Mr. Pinaki 
Misra, Senior Advocate and other learned counsel and they have 
strongly supported the decision of the Division Bench. 
7.1	 Counsel for M/s Laxmi Buildtech Pvt Ltd7 has submitted that 
they have neither violated nor acted in breach of any provision 
of environmental laws and therefore they cannot be subjected 
to any penalty or criminal prosecution. Counsel for other 
respondents further submitted that they have deemed consent 
as well as EIA clearance from the Ministry. They have also 
submitted that imposition and collection of damages by the 
State Boards is outside the powers vested in them under the 
Water and Air Acts.
7.2	 Counsel for M/s Bharti Realty Ltd has submitted that it is a 
settled principle of law that if a statute provides for a thing to 
be done in a particular manner, then it has to be done in that 
manner and no other.8 This principle, according to the learned 
counsel, squarely applies to the present case as Chapter VII 
and Chapter VI of the Water and Air Acts have a prescribed 
5	
(2000) 6 SCC 213, para 13-17.
6	
State of MP v. Centre for Environment Protection Research & Development, (2020) 9 SCC 781. 
7	
Civil Appeal No. 2001 of 2013.
8	
Chandra Kishore Jha v. Mahavir Prasad & Ors, (1999) 8 SCC 266.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
375
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
procedure to be followed before imposing penalties. It is further 
argued that the role of any State Board is in the nature of a 
complainant and not that of an adjudicatory authority. In this 
vein, it is submitted that any other interpretation would render 
the chapter on ‘Penalties and Procedures’ nugatory and otiose. 
It is also submitted that the power to give directions under 
Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts is “subject to 
provisions of this Act”. Written submissions also refer to the 
recent amendments to the Water and Air Acts, empowering 
an Adjudicating Officer, not below the rank of Joint Secretary 
of Government of India or Secretary to State Government, for 
imposing penalties for contravention of provisions of the Acts. 
6.	
Issue.
8.	
The core question in these appeals is - whether the regulatory boards 
can, in exercise of powers under Section 33A of the Water Act and 
Section 31A of the Air Act, impose and collect as restitutionary 
and compensatory damages fixed sums of monies or require 
furnishing bank guarantees as an ex-ante measure towards potential 
environmental damage?
7.	
Existing Legal Regime for Pollution Control in India.
9.	
Under the Water Act and the Air Act, the State Boards have a broad 
statutory mandate to prevent, control and abate water pollution and 
air pollution. Under Section 17 of the Water Act, the State Boards 
are to shoulder enormous responsibilities and their functions are 
reproduced herein for ready reference - 
“Section 17. Functions of State Board – (1) Subject to 
the provisions of this Act, the functions of a State Board 
shall be— (a) to plan a comprehensive programme for the 
prevention, control or abatement of pollution of streams 
and wells in the State and to secure the execution thereof; 
(b) to advise the State Government on any matter 
concerning the prevention, control or abatement of water 
pollution;
(c) to collect and disseminate information relating to water 
pollution and the prevention, control or abatement thereof; 
376
Supreme Court Reports
(d) to encourage, conduct and participate in investigations 
and research relating to problems of water pollution and 
prevention, control or abatement of water pollution; 
(e) to collaborate with the Central Board in organising 
the training of persons engaged or to be engaged in 
programmes relating to prevention, control or abatement 
of water pollution and to organise mass education 
programmes relating thereto; 
(f) to inspect sewage or trade effluents, works and plants 
for the treatment of sewage and trade effluents and to 
review plans, specifications or other data relating to plants 
set up for the treatment of water, works for the purification 
thereof and the system for the disposal of sewage or trade 
effluents or in connection with the grant of any consent 
as required by this Act; 
(g) to lay down, modify or annul effluent standards for the 
sewage and trade effluents and for the quality of receiving 
waters (not being water in an inter-State stream) resulting 
from the discharge of effluents and to classify waters of 
the State; 
(h) to evolve economical and reliable methods of treatment 
of sewage and trade effluents, having regard to the 
peculiar conditions of soils, climate and water resources 
of different regions and more especially the prevailing 
flow characteristics of water in streams and wells which 
render it impossible to attain even the minimum degree 
of dilution; 
(i) to evolve methods of utilisation of sewage and suitable 
trade effluents in agriculture; 
(j) to evolve efficient methods of disposal of sewage and 
trade effluents on land, as are necessary on account of 
the predominant conditions of scant stream flows that do 
not provide for major part of the year the minimum degree 
of dilution; 
(k) to lay down standards of treatment of sewage and 
trade effluents to be discharged into any particular stream 
taking into account the minimum fair weather dilution 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
377
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
available in that stream and the tolerance limits of pollution 
permissible in the water of the stream, after the discharge 
of such effluents; 
(l) to make, vary or revoke any order— 
(i) for the prevention, control or abatement of discharges 
of waste into streams or wells; 
(ii) requiring any person concerned to construct new 
systems for the disposal of sewage and trade effluents 
or to modify, alter or extend any such existing system 
or adopt such remedial measures as are necessary to 
prevent, control or abate water pollution; 
(m) to lay down effluent standards to be complied with by 
persons while causing discharge of sewage or sullage or 
both and to lay down, modify or annul effluent standards 
for the sewage and trade effluents; 
(n) to advise the State Government with respect to the 
location of any industry the carrying on of which is likely 
to pollute a stream or well; 
(o) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed 
or as may, from time to time, be entrusted to it by the 
Central Board or the State Government.
(2) The Board may establish or recognize a laboratory or 
laboratories to enable the Board to perform its functions 
under this section efficiently, including the analysis of 
samples of water from any stream or well or of samples 
of any sewage or trade effluents.”
10.	 Section 17 of the Air Act9, substantially similar to its equivalent 
9	
Section 17 of Air Act states –
17. Functions of State Boards.— (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and without prejudice to the 
performance of its functions, if any, under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, the 
functions of a State Board shall be— 
(a) to plan a comprehensive programme for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution 
and to secure the execution thereof; 
(b) to advise the State Government on any matter concerning the prevention, control or abatement 
relating to air pollution; 
(c) to collect and disseminate information relating to air pollution; 
(d) to collaborate with the Central Board in organising the training of persons engaged or to be 
engaged in programmes relating to prevention, control or abatement of air pollution and to organise 
a mass-education programme relating thereto; 
378
Supreme Court Reports
under the Water Act, also indicates the crucial responsibilities of the 
State Boards in discharge of their mandate. Chapter V of the Water 
Act and Chapter IV of the Air Act include provisions that prescribe 
the regulatory powers of the State Boards. These powers include 
the power to issue, modify or withdraw consent10, power to obtain 
information11, power of entry and inspection12 and power to take 
samples13. 
8.	
Insertion of Sections 33A & 31A in Water and Air Acts.
11.	 In 1988, both Acts were amended. Notably, through amendments 
the State Boards were further empowered to give directions under 
Section 33A of the Water Act and Section 31A14 of the Air Act. These 
(e) to inspect, at all reasonable times, any control equipment, industrial plant or manufacturing 
process and to give, by order, such directions to such persons as it may consider necessary to take 
steps for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; 
(f) to inspect air pollution control areas at such intervals as it may think necessary, assess the 
quality of air therein and take steps for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution in such 
areas; 
(g) to lay down, in consultation with the Central Board and having regard to the standards for 
the quality of air laid down by the Central Board, standards for emission of air pollutants into the 
atmosphere from industrial plants and automobiles or for the discharge of any air pollutant into 
the atmosphere from any other source whatsoever not being a ship or an aircraft: Provided that 
different standards for emission may be laid down under this clause for different industrial plants 
having regard to the quantity and composition of emission of air pollutants into the atmosphere 
from such industrial plants; 
(h) to advise the State Government with respect to the suitability of any premises or location for 
carrying on any industry which is likely to cause air pollution; 
(i) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed or as may, from time to time, be entrusted 
to it by the Central Board or the State Government; 
(j) to do such other things and to perform such other acts as it may think necessary for the proper 
discharge of its functions and generally for the purpose of carrying into effect the purposes of this 
Act. 
(2) A State Board may establish or recognise a laboratory or laboratories to enable the State Board to 
perform its functions under this section efficiently.
10	
Sections 25, 27 of Water Act and Section 21 of Air Act
11	
Section 20 of Water Act and Section 25 of Air Act
12	
Section 23 of Water Act and Section 24 of Air Act
13	
Section 21 of Water Act and Section 26 of Air Act
14	
Section 31A of the Air Act states – 
31A. Power to give directions.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, but subject to 
the provisions of this Act, and to any directions that the Central Government may give in this behalf, 
a Board may, in the exercise of its powers and performance of its functions under this Act, issue any 
directions in writing to any person, officer or authority, and such person, officer or authority shall be 
bound to comply with such directions. 
Explanation.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue directions under 
this section includes the power to direct— 
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, operation or process; or 
(b) the stoppage or regulation of supply of electricity, water or any other service.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
379
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
two provisions are identically worded. Section 33A of the Water Act 
is as under;
“Section 33A. Power to give directions.—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law, but subject to the 
provisions of this Act, and to any directions that the Central 
Government may give in this behalf, a Board may, in the 
exercise of its powers and performance of its functions 
under this Act, issue any directions in writing to any person, 
officer or authority, and such person, officer or authority 
shall be bound to comply with such directions. 
Explanation.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that the power to issue directions under this 
section includes the power to direct— 
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, 
operation or process; or 
(b) the stoppage or regulation of supply of electricity, water 
or any other service.”
12.	 The directions contemplated under Sections 33A and 31A of the Water 
and Air Acts must be in furtherance of the powers and functions of 
the Boards and they must be in writing. These provisions, declares 
that the power to issue directions will include the power to direct 
closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, operation or process. 
Further, this power extends to directing the stoppage or regulation 
of supply of electricity, water or any other service. The power to 
give directions has been worded broadly, and it allows the Boards 
significant flexibility in deciding the nature of directions. The legislative 
intention of granting these powers through the 1988 amendment 
can be inferred from the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 
Water Act, which reads as follows – 
“2. The Water Act is implemented by the Central and 
State Governments and the Central and State Pollution 
Control Boards. Over the past few years, the implementing 
agencies have experienced some more administrative 
and practical difficulties in effectively implementing the 
provisions of the Act. The ways and means to remove these 
difficulties have been thoroughly examined in consultation 
380
Supreme Court Reports
with the implementing agencies. Taking into account the 
views expressed, it is proposed to amend certain provisions 
of the Act in order to remove such difficulties….
3. The Bill, inter alia, seeks to make the following 
amendments in the Act, namely:—
….
(iv) in order to effectively prevent water pollution, the penal 
provisions of the Act are proposed to be made stricter 
and bring them at par with the punishments prescribed 
in the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 
as amended by Act 47 of 1987;
….
(vi) it is proposed to empower the Boards to give directions 
to any person, officer or authority including the power to 
direct closure or regulation of offending industry, operation 
or process or stoppage or regulation of supply of services 
such as water and electricity;”
13.	 Similar objective is expressed for the amendment introduced in the 
Air Act. 15
14.	 An appeal against directions issued under Section 33A of the 
Water Act by the State Board can be filed before the National 
Green Tribunal under Section 33B, introduced in 201016. Unlike the 
15	
Statement of Objects and Reasons for Air Act states, “2. The Air Act is implemented by the Central 
and State Governments and the Central and State Boards. Over the past few years, the implementing 
agencies have experienced some administrative and practical difficulties in effectively implementing the 
provisions of this Act and have brought these to the notice of Government. The ways and means to 
remove these difficulties have been thoroughly examined in consultation with the concerned Central 
Government departments, the State Governments and the Central and State Boards. Taking into 
account the views expressed, the Government have decided to make certain amendments to the Act in 
order to remove such difficulties. 3. The Bill, inter alia, seeks to make the following amendments in the 
Act, namely—
….
iv) In order to prevent effectively air pollution, the punishments provided in the Act are proposed to be 
made stricter.
….
(vii) It is proposed to empower the Boards to give directions to any person, officer or authority including 
the power to direct closure or regulation of offending establishments or stoppage or regulation of supply 
of services such as, water and electricity. (viii) It is proposed to empower the Boards to approach courts 
to obtain orders restraining any person from causing air pollution.”
16	
Act 19 of 2010.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
381
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
Water Act there is no specific Appeal provision against directions 
issued under Section 31A of the Air Act. This asymmetry must be 
addressed legislatively. 
15.	 Offences and penalties under the two Acts, and the related procedures, 
are covered in Chapter VII of the Water Act and Chapter VI of the 
Air Act. These chapters have undergone significant and substantial 
amendments. Prior to the amendments, the two Acts stipulated 
penalties in the form of imprisonment, monetary fine or both for 
offences under the statute. Courts could only take cognizance of an 
offence if a complaint was filed by a Board or any officer authorized 
by it, or by any person who had given notice of the alleged offence 
and of his intention to make a complaint. No court inferior to that of a 
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial magistrate of the first class can 
try an offence punishable under the two Acts. Be that as it may, for 
the present purpose we have to examine and interpret Sections 33A 
and 31A of the Water and Air Acts.
9.	
Interpretation of and for Environmental Institutions.	
16.	 Our constitutionalism bears the hallmark of an expansive interpretation 
of fundamental rights. But such creative expansion is only a job half 
done if the depth of the remedies, consequent upon infringement, 
remain shallow. In other words, remedial jurisprudence must keep 
pace with expanding rights and regulatory challenges. It is not 
sufficient that courts adopt injunctory, mandatory and compensatory 
remedies, but our regulators also must be empowered in that regard. 
However, the legislative grammar must be elastic for us to infuse the 
regulators with power to fashion different remedies. This infusion must 
also be tempered‡ with the necessary guidelines and parameters of 
exercise of remedial powers, failing which such infusion would aid 
arbitrary use. Our firm view is that remedial powers or restitutionary 
directives are a necessary concomitant of both the fundamental rights 
of citizens who suffer environmental wrongs and an equal concomitant 
of the duties of a statutory regulator, which are informed by Part IV 
A of the constitution. To that extent, the functions and powers of a 
regulator must be inspired by the obligation in Part IV A and Article 
48 A. The State’s ‘endeavour to protect and improve the environment’ 
will be partial, if it does not encompass a duty to restitute.
‡ Ed. Note: “tempered” instead of “tampered” in terms of subsequent corrigendum.
382
Supreme Court Reports
17.	 Of all the duties imposed under Article 51A, the obligation to conserve 
and protect water and air, is perhaps the most significant, amidst our 
climate change crisis. The Water Act and the Air Act institutionalised 
all efforts and actions that need to be taken to protect air that we 
breathe and water that we consume by creating the Pollution Control 
Boards. These Boards functioning as our environment regulators 
are expected to act with institutional foresight by evolving necessary 
policy perspectives and action plans. Working with perpetual seal and 
succession, they are to develop and retain institutional memory so 
that they can act on the basis of the experience, data and information 
that they would have gathered and processed. Institutional expertise 
is critical, and these bodies are to employ human resource which 
have domain expertise and talent. These bodies are intended to 
maintain institutional integrity by taking independent and objective 
decisions without governmental or industrial control. These values 
flow naturally if there is institutional transparency and accountability. 
It is in this perspective that we need to interpret Section 33A of the 
Water Act and 31A of the Air Act.
10.	 Duty to Restitute v. Power to Punish and Penalise.
18.	 There is a distinction between an action for environmental 
damages for restitution or remediation and imposition of penalties 
or fines levied at the culmination of a punitive action. This Court in 
M.C. Mehta (supra), while referring to the provisions of the Water 
Act, Air Act and the Environment Protection Act observed – 
“17. All the three Acts, referred to above, also contemplate 
the taking of the cognizance of the offences by the court. 
Thus, a person guilty of contravention of provisions of any 
of the three Acts which constitutes an offence has to be 
prosecuted for such offence and in case the offence is found 
proved then alone can he be punished with imprisonment 
and fine or both. The sine qua non for punishment of 
imprisonment and fine is a fair trial in a competent court. 
The punishment of imprisonment or fine can be imposed 
only after the person is found guilty.”
“24. Pollution is a civil wrong. By its very nature, it is a tort 
committed against the community as a whole. A person, 
therefore, who is guilty of causing pollution has to pay 
damages (compensation) for restoration of the environment 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
383
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
and ecology. He has also to pay damages to those who 
have suffered loss on account of the act of the offender.…” 
19.	 Therefore, Indian law distinguishes between the imposition of a 
monetary penalty or fine, which constitutes punitive action following 
a determination of guilt after adherence to the statutorily prescribed 
procedure, and the payment of damages for restitution or remediation 
as compensatory relief.
20.	 In this context, it is important to turn to one of the key principles of 
Indian environmental law – the Polluter Pays principle. This principle 
has been a part of Indian jurisprudence since 1996. In Indian Council 
for Enviro-Legal Action v. Union of India17, this Court  held that 
according to the Polluter Pays principle the responsibility for repairing 
the damage is that of the offending industry. The Court further held 
that the powers of the Central Government to issue directions under 
Section 5 read with Section 3 of the Environment Protection Act 
include the power to impose costs for remedial measures - 
“60. … Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986 expressly empowers the Central Government (or its 
delegate, as the case may be) to “take all such measures 
as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of 
protecting and improving the quality of environment…”. 
Section 5 clothes the Central Government (or its delegate) 
with the power to issue directions for achieving the objects 
of the Act. Read with the wide definition of ‘environment’ 
in Section 2(a), Sections 3 and 5 clothe the Central 
Government with all such powers as are “necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of protecting and improving 
the quality of the environment”. The Central Government 
is empowered to take all measures and issue all such 
directions as are called for for the above purpose. In 
the present case, the said powers will include giving 
directions for the removal of sludge, for undertaking 
remedial measures and also the power to impose the 
cost of remedial measures on the offending industry and 
utilise the amount so recovered for carrying out remedial 
measures. This Court can certainly give directions to the 
17	
(1996) 3 SCC 212
384
Supreme Court Reports
Central Government/its delegate to take all such measures, 
if in a given case this Court finds that such directions are 
warranted. …
67. The question of liability of the respondents to defray 
the costs of remedial measures can also be looked into 
from another angle, which has now come to be accepted 
universally as a sound principle, viz., the “Polluter 
Pays” principle. …Thus, according to this principle, the 
responsibility for repairing the damage is that of the 
offending industry. Sections 3 and 5 empower the Central 
Government to give directions and take measures for 
giving effect to this principle. In all the circumstances 
of the case, we think it appropriate that the task of 
determining the amount required for carrying out the 
remedial measures, its recovery/realisation and the task 
of undertaking the remedial measures is placed upon 
the Central Government in the light of the provisions of 
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. It is, of course, 
open to the Central Government to take the help and 
assistance of State Government, RPCB or such other 
agency or authority, as they think fit.”
(emphasis added)
21.	 Subsequently, the Court in Vellore Citizens’ Welfare Forum v. Union of 
India18, has held that the liability for environmental damage includes 
both a compensatory aspect and a restorative or remedial aspect- 
“12. … The “Polluter Pays Principle” as interpreted by 
this Court means that the absolute liability for harm to the 
environment extends not only to compensate the victims of 
pollution but also the cost of restoring the environmental 
degradation. Remediation of the damaged environment is 
part of the process of “Sustainable Development” and as 
such the polluter is liable to pay the cost to the individual 
sufferers as well as the cost of reversing the damaged 
ecology.”
(emphasis added)
18	
(1996) 5 SCC 647 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
385
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
22.	 Application of the Polluter Pays principle not only includes payment 
for restoring the damaged environment, taking remedial action to 
deal with the damage and compensating for the direct harm caused, 
but also for avoiding pollution. In Research Foundation for Science 
(18) v. Union of India19, this Court held - 
“29. The polluter-pays principle basically means that the 
producer of goods or other items should be responsible for 
the cost of preventing or dealing with any pollution that the 
process causes. This includes environmental cost as well 
as direct cost to the people or property, it also covers cost 
incurred in avoiding pollution and not just those related to 
remedying any damage. It will include full environmental 
cost and not just those which are immediately tangible. 
The principle also does not mean that the polluter can 
pollute and pay for it. The nature and extent of cost and 
the circumstances in which the principle will apply may 
differ from case to case.”
(emphasis added)
23.	 The Court further held that the observations of the Court in in Deepak 
Nitrite Ltd. v. State of Gujarat20 that “mere violation of the law in not 
observing the norms would result in degradation of environment 
would not be correct” were confined to the facts of that case. The 
Court clarified that the actual degradation of the environment is not 
a necessary condition for the application of polluter pays principle, 
as long as the offending activities have the potential of degrading 
the environment - 
“30…The decision also cannot be said to have laid down 
a proposition that in the absence of actual degradation of 
environment by the offending activities, the payment for 
repair on application of the polluter-pays principle cannot 
be ordered. The said case is not relevant for considering 
cases like the present one where offending activities have the 
potential of degrading the environment. In any case, in the 
present case, the point simply is about the payments to be 
19	
(2005) 13 SCC 186.
20	
(2004) 6 SCC 402
386
Supreme Court Reports
made for the expenditure to be incurred for the destruction of 
imported hazardous waste and amount spent for conducting 
tests for determining whether it is such a waste or not…”
(emphasis added)
24.	 The distinction between a punitive action and a direction to pay 
environmental damages was made by the National Green Tribunal 
in State Pollution Control Board, Odisha v M/s Swastik Ispat Pvt Ltd 
and Others21. The Tribunal in this case was considering the legality 
of forfeiture of bank guarantees in case a defaulting industry did not 
comply with the regulatory conditions within the stipulated timeframe. 
The Tribunal expressly considered the opinion of the High Court in 
the impugned judgment before us today and held - 
“45. It is evident from the above facts and the reasoning 
that there was actual levy of penalty or damages by the 
DPCC and it was in consequence of such imposition 
of penalty/damages that the Units were called upon to 
furnish bank guarantees for granting of consent. In other 
words, bank guarantee was required to be furnished in 
furtherance to the imposition of a penalty or damages 
in that case. It was not an act de hors the imposition of 
penalty and had the element of punitive action. In the 
present case, it is not a consequence of a punitive or 
penal action but is in exercise of the powers vested in 
the Board in relation to recalling the conditions of consent 
and ensuring their implementation while also making 
compensatory provision for remedying the apprehended 
wrong to the environment. In the cases in hand, the 
Board has not imposed any penalty upon the units but 
has granted consent to them on certain conditions, none 
of which is punitive. They squarely fall within the power of 
the Board to prevent and control pollution in consonance 
with the scheme of the Acts concerned. Thus, on facts, 
the judgments of the High Court in Splendor (supra) do 
not have any application to the present case. In any case, 
we are of the considered view that asking for a bank 
21	
2014 SCC OnLine NGT 13.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
387
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
guarantee as an interim measure for due performance of 
the conditions of the consent order being compensatory 
in nature, is not punitive. 
46. We have already noticed above that there is a clear 
distinction between a penal and a compensatory provision. 
In such matters, the paramount question that would 
normally fall for determination before a court or tribunal 
would be whether the action contemplated is penal or 
compensatory. This issue shall have to be decided with 
reference to the facts of the case, the provisions of the law 
applicable and the intent of the authority concerned. Once 
it falls in the ‘compensatory’ field, then it will necessarily 
be beyond the purview of penalty….”
(emphasis added)
25.	 In Swastik Ispat, the Green Tribunal correctly interpreted Sections 
33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts. The judgment of the High 
Court in Splendor had not yet been taken up or considered by 
this Court at that time, the Tribunal had to distinguish the facts of 
Splendor to arrive at its own conclusion. In view of our reasoning 
and interpretation of Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts, 
we have no hesitation to hold that the Green Tribunal is correct in 
its approach.
26.	 More recently, in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad, In Re v. Union of 
India22, this Court while considering the issue of illegal construction 
in the Corbett Tiger Reserve drew the distinction between action 
against persons violating the law and measures for restoration of 
the environmental damage. The Court held - 
“173. … However, the principle of restoration of damaged 
ecosystem would require the States to promote the 
recovery of threatened species. We are of the considered 
view that the States would be required to take steps for 
the identification and effective implementation of active 
restoration measures that are localised to the particular 
ecosystem that was damaged. The focus has to be on 
22	
(2025) 2 SCC 641
388
Supreme Court Reports
restoration of the ecosystem as close and similar as 
possible to the specific one that was damaged.
175.  We find that, bringing the culprits to face the 
proceedings is a different matter and restoration of the 
damage already done is a different matter. We are of the 
considered view that the State cannot run away from its 
responsibilities to restore the damage done to the forest. 
The State, apart from preventing such acts in the future, 
should take immediate steps for restoration of the damage 
already done; undertake an exercise for determining the 
valuation of the damage done and recover it from the 
persons found responsible for causing such a damage.”
(emphasis added)
11.	 Principles.
27.	 Based on a review of precedents on this issue, the following legal 
position emerges – 
I.	
There is a distinction between a direction for payment of 
restitutionary and compensatory damages as a remedial 
measure for environmental damage or as an ex-ante measure 
towards potential environmental damage on the one hand; and 
a punitive action of fine or imprisonment for violations under 
Chapters VII of the Water Act and VI of the Air Act on the other 
hand. 
II.	
If directions in furtherance of restitutionary and compensatory 
measures are issued, these are not to be considered as 
punitive in nature. Punitive action can only be taken through the 
procedure prescribed in the statute for example under chapters 
VII and VI of the Water and Air Acts respectively. 
III.	
Indian environmental law has assimilated23 the principle of 
Polluter Pays and there is also a statutory incorporation of 
this principle in our laws.24 The invocation of this principle is 
23	
Indian Council for Enviro-Legal Action (supra n.12); Vellore (supra n 13).
24	
Section 20. Tribunal to apply certain principles- The Tribunal shall, while passing any order or 
decision or award, apply the principles of sustainable development, the precautionary principle and the 
polluter pays principle.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
389
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
triggered in the situations25; i) when an established threshold 
or prescribed requirement is exceeded or breached, and it 
does result in environmental damage, ii) when an established 
threshold or prescribed requirement is not exceeded or breached, 
nevertheless the act in question results in environmental damage 
and also iii) when a potential risk or a likely adverse impact to 
the environment is anticipated, irrespective of whether or not 
prescribed thresholds or requirements are exceeded or breached.
IV.	
Environmental regulators have a compelling duty to adopt and 
apply preventive measures irrespective of actual environmental 
damage. Ex-ante action shall be taken by these regulators and 
for this purpose a certain measure in exercise of powers under 
Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts is necessary.
V.	
The powers of the Boards under Sections 33A and 31A of 
the Water and Air Acts are identical to that of Section 5 of 
the Environment Protection Act. Under Section 5, the Central 
Government or its delegate has the power to issue directions 
to the polluting industry to pay certain amounts and utilise the 
said fund for carrying out remedial measures. The Boards are 
empowered to take similar actions under Sections 33A and 
31A of the Acts.
28.	 Having considered the principles that govern our environmental laws 
and on interpretation of Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air 
Acts, we are of the opinion that that the Division Bench of the High 
Court was not correct in restrictively reading powers of the Boards. We 
are of the opinion that these regulators in exercise of these powers 
can impose and collect, as restitutionary or compensatory damages 
fixed sum of monies or require furnishing bank guarantees as an 
ex-ante measure towards potential or actual environmental damage. 
29.	 There is no doubt that Section 33A of the Water Act and Section 31A of 
the Air Act give the State Boards powers to issue necessary directions 
for environmental restoration, remediation and compensation and for 
the payment of costs for the same. The National Green Tribunal’s 
judgment in Swastik Ispat correctly identified the Boards powers to 
issue directions for payment of environmental damages under Section 
25	
Loveleen Bhullar, ‘The Polluter Pays Principle: Scope and Limits or Judicial Decisions’; in Shibani 
Ghosh (ed.), Indian Environmental Law (Orient BlackSwan 2019).
390
Supreme Court Reports
33A of the Water Act and the Section 31A of the Air Act. A restrictive 
interpretation which fails to differentiate between environmental 
damages and punitive action significantly encumbers the Boards 
ability to discharge its duties. 
30.	 The Board’s powers under Section 33A of the Water Act and Section 
31A of the Air Act have to be read in light of the legal position on the 
application of Polluter Pays principle as formulated and explained. 
This means that State Board cannot impose environmental damages 
in case of every contravention or offence under the Water Act and 
Air Act. It is only when the State Board has made a determination 
that some form of environmental damage or harm has been caused 
by the erring entity, or the same is so imminent, that the State Board 
must initiate action under Section 33A of the Water Act and Section 
31A of the Air Act. 
31.	 At this stage, we must also take note of the recent 2024 amendments26 
to the Water and Air Acts. Two major changes relevant for our 
consideration are that of decriminalisation27 and introduction of 
the office of “Adjudicatory Officer”28. Even after the amendments, 
in our opinion, there is no conflict between the powers of the 
State Boards to direct payment of environmental damages under 
Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts and the powers of 
the Adjudicating Officer to impose penalties under Chapter VII of 
the Water Act and Chapter VI of the Air Act. The decriminalization 
of offences under these Chapters has not removed the punitive 
26	
The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Act, 2024, Jan Vishwas (Amendment of 
Provisions) Act, 2023.
27	
Section 41 in the erstwhile Water Act has been substituted by sections 41 and 41A, whereby contravention 
of directions issued under section 20 (for obtaining information), 32 (for imposing emergency measures 
in case of pollution), 33 (for restraining apprehended pollution) or 33A would now be punishable by 
penalty alone; thereby replacing the earlier penal framework comprising of imprisonment and fine. Similar 
amendments done for section 42 (penalty for certain acts), section 43 for contravention of directions 
under section 24 (prohibiting use of stream or well), section 44 (prohibiting alteration of meter, etc.), 
and section 45A (residuary). Correspondingly, under the Air Act criminal liability under section 37 for 
contravention of directions under section 22 (restricting emission beyond standards) or section 31A has 
been restricted to fine alone. Similar amendments have been brought in section 38 and 39 (residuary). 
Punishment for imprisonment has been retained only for violation of section 21 and failure to pay penalty 
or additional penalty under section 39D. 
28	
In the Water Act, section 45B puts in place a new office by the title of ‘Adjudicating Officer’, who would be 
an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Centre or Secretary to the State, appointed by the 
Central Government. Adjudicating Officer is empowered to inquire and impose penalties under sections 
41, 41A, 42, 43, 44, 45A and 48. Appeal against such imposition lies before the National Green Tribunal 
as per section 45C. The Adjudicating Officer is further empowered to file a complaint for cognizance 
under section 49. Corresponding additions have been made under the Air Act as well under sections 39A 
(Adjudicating Officer), 39B (Appeal to NGT) and 43 (Cognizance of offences). 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
391
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
nature of actions that can be taken under them. There remains 
a clear distinction between the nature of directions that the State 
Boards can issue under Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air 
Acts for payment of environmental damage and the determination 
by Adjudicating Officers. The former is compensatory in nature and 
will be resorted to when remedial measures are being undertaken 
to restore the degraded environment or pollution caused. The latter 
is a penalty for an offence under the law and is imposed with the 
objective of punishing the offender. This penalty collected here will 
not be specifically directed towards the restoration of the degraded 
environment (for instance, to decontaminate a pond that has been 
polluted due to discharge of untreated sewage). It will be deposited 
in the Environmental Protection Fund that is to be set up under 
Section 16 of the Environment (Protection) Act. According to Section 
16(3) of the EP Act, the Fund shall be used for, (a) the promotion of 
awareness, education and research for the protection of environment; 
(b) the expenses for achieving the objects and for purposes of the 
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981(14 of 1981) and 
under this Act; and (c) such other purposes, as may be prescribed.
A.	
Board’s Responsibility to Choose Appropriate Course of 
Action.
32.	 Given their broad statutory mandate and the significant duty towards 
public health and environmental protection the Boards must have 
the power and distinction to decide the appropriate action against 
a polluting entity. It is essential that the Boards function effectively 
and efficiently by adopting such measures as is necessary in a given 
situation. The Boards can decide whether a polluting entity needs 
to be punished by imposition of penalty or if the situation demands 
immediate restoration of the environmental damage by the polluter 
or both.
B.	
Powers Must Be Guided by Transparency and Non-
Arbitrariness.
33.	 While we hold that the Boards have the power to direct the payment 
of environmental damages, we make it clear that this power must 
always be guided by two overarching principles. First, that the power 
cannot be exercised in an arbitrary manner; and second, the process 
of exercising this power must be infused with transparency.
392
Supreme Court Reports
34.	 This Court has underscored the importance of strong institutional 
frameworks in environmental governance that are effective, 
accountable and transparent. In Bengaluru Development Authority v. 
Sudhakar Hegde29, this Court held -
“95.  The protection of the environment is premised 
not only on the active role of courts, but also on 
robust institutional frameworks within which every 
stakeholder complies with its duty to ensure sustainable 
development. A framework of environmental governance 
committed to the rule of law requires a regime which 
has effective, accountable and transparent institutions. 
Equally important is responsive, inclusive, participatory 
and representative decision-making. Environmental 
governance is founded on the rule of law and emerges 
from the values of our Constitution. Where the health 
of the environment is key to preserving the right to life 
as a constitutionally recognised value under Article 21 
of the Constitution, proper structures for environmental 
decision-making find expression in the guarantee 
against arbitrary action and the affirmative duty of fair 
treatment under Article 14 of the Constitution. Sustainable 
development is premised not merely on the redressal 
of the failure of democratic institutions in the protection 
of the environment, but ensuring that such failures do 
not take place.”
(emphasis added)
35.	 To ensure that the Boards impose restitutionary and the compensatory 
environmental damages in a fair transparent, non-arbitrary manner, 
with procedural certainty, necessary subordinate legislation in the 
form of rules and regulations must be notified. This shall include 
methods by which environmental damage is determined, and the 
consequent quantum of damages are assessed. They may also 
incorporate certain basic principles of natural justice for fairness 
in action. At present environmental damages are being levied by 
the Boards on the basis of certain guidelines issued by the Central 
29	
(2020) 15 SCC 63
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
393
Delhi Pollution Control Committee v. Lodhi Property Co. Ltd. Etc.
Pollution Control Board in its document “General framework for 
imposing environmental damage compensation” issue in December, 
2022. These guidelines seem to have been issued pursuant to the 
directions of the NGT.30 It is important that these guidelines are 
reviewed thoroughly and issued in the form of Rules and Regulations. 
This will enable declaration of a law that applies and ensures its 
recognition and easy implementation.
36.	 These Rules must also create enabling framework for citizens to 
file complaints about environmental damage. Public participation 
in environmental protection has assumed great importance with 
climate change threatening to drastically disrupt our way of living. 
Boards, being the first line of defence against polluting activities, 
must provide easy accessibility and encourage public participation 
in their function and decision making.
37.	 While we have reversed the decision of the High Court on the 
principle of law and hold that the environmental regulators, the 
Pollution Control Boards, can impose and collect as restitutionary 
and compensatory damages fixed sums of monies or require 
furnishing bank guarantees as an ex-ante measure towards potential 
environmental damage in exercise of powers under Sections 33A and 
31A of the Water and Air Acts, we issue the following consequential 
directions.
38.	 In view of the fact that the show cause notices in these cases relate 
to the year 2006 and those show cause notices were set-aside by the 
Single as well as by the Division Benches of the High Court, we are 
of the opinion that no purpose will be served in reviving the said show 
cause notices at this point of time. In the facts and circumstances 
of the case while we allow the appeal on the principle of law there 
shall not be any consequential direction for reviving the show cause 
notices which have been set-aside concurrently by the Single as 
well as by the Division Bench of the High Court. If certain amounts 
have been collected on the basis of the said show cause notices 
they shall be returned by DPCC within a period of six weeks from 
the date of this order, and if amounts are not deposited or collected 
the appellant, DPCC shall not take any further action. 
30	
Pursuant to the NGT in its order in O.A. No. 606/2018 dated 24.04.2019.
394
Supreme Court Reports
39.	 For the reasons stated above:
(a)	 we allow these appeals and set aside the judgement and order 
dated 23.01.2012, passed by the Division Bench of the High 
Court of Delhi to the extent of declaration of law but direct that 
the show cause notices that have been set aside by the High 
Court shall not be revived.
(b)	 we direct that the Pollution Control Boards can impose and 
collect as restitutionary and compensatory damages fixed 
sums of monies or require furnishing bank guarantees as an 
ex-ante measure towards potential environmental damage in 
exercise of powers under Sections 33A and 31A of the Water 
and Air Acts. 
(c)	
it is further directed that the power to impose or collect 
restitutionary or compensatory damages or the requirement to 
furnish bank guarantees as an ex-ante measure under Sections 
33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts shall be enforced only 
after detailing the principle and procedure incorporating basic 
principles of natural justice in the subordinate legislation.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan