[2025] 6 S.C.R. 123 : 2025 INSC 626
Powergrid Corporation of India Limited 
v. 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 5857-5858 of 2011) 
05 May 2025
[Abhay S. Oka and Ujjal Bhuyan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The questions arose for consideration whether the appellate tribunal 
and Central Electricity Regulatory Commission justified in rejecting 
the appellant’s claim of additional capitalization due to replacement 
of the damaged Inter-connecting Transformers-ICTs; whether the 
self-insurance policy of the appellant covered the cost of replacement 
of the damaged ICTs; and whether the Member Secretary of NRPC 
should have been directed by the appellate tribunal to issue revised 
availability certificate for the transmission assets.
Headnotes†
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and 
Conditions of Tariff) Regulations, 2004 – Reg. 53 – Additional 
capitalisation – Claim of – Appellant owned and operated 
transmission systems in the northern region-R I and R II – 
Inter-connecting transformers in the R I transmission system 
got burnt and damaged due to internal faults – Transformers 
from R II temporarily taken out and diverted to R I – Appellant 
restored the transformers at R-1 and ICTs taken out from 
R II were restored by new/repaired transformers – Petition 
by the appellant before the respondent-CERC claiming de-
capitalization for the transformers taken out from R II and 
additional capitalization for the new/repaired transformer 
installed at R I – Claim not allowed by CERC holding that the 
net cost for such replacement has to be met out from the 
insurance fund reserve maintained by the appellant under 
the internal insurance policy; and also did not accede to the 
prayer of the appellant for giving directions to the Northern 
Regional Power Committee for issuance of revised availability 
certificate – Appeal thereagainst, dismissed by the appellate 
tribunal – Interference: 
* Author
124
Supreme Court Reports
Held: Not called for – Appellate tribunal and CERC justified in rejecting 
the appellant’s claim of additional capitalization due to replacement 
of the damaged ICTs – Reg. 53 provides that additional capital 
expenditure incurred after the commercial operation date and upto 
the cut-off-date may be admitted by the CERC if such expenditure 
relates to deferred liabilities, deferred works, procurement of initial 
spares, etc. – Reg. 53 does not include within its scope replacement 
of transformers due to damage or failure – As per Reg. 53(2)(iv) 
any additional work/services which becomes necessary for the 
efficient and successful operation of the project but not included in 
the original project cost may be admitted by CERC as additional 
capital expenditure – All that the appellant had done was diversion 
and replacement of transformers which cannot be construed as 
doing any additional work/services u/Reg.53(2)(iv) – Nothing on 
record to show that prior to the breakdown of transformers the 
transmission systems were in bad shape or had started wearing 
out – As regards the self-insurance policy, the loss caused to the 
appellant by fire would be covered by the policy as it covered all fires 
which caused loss without any exception and as all the ICTs were 
operating until those got burnt – Proximate cause for the damage 
to the transformers is the implosion/explosion in the internal/external 
machinery of the transformers which caused fire – Self-insurance 
policy of the appellant covered the cost of replacement of the 
damaged ICTs – Appellate tribunal justified in directing the appellant 
to finance the net cost from the self-insurance fund reserve as part 
of the operation and maintenance charges – As decapitalization and 
additional capitalization of the replaced ICTs have not been allowed, 
issuance of direction to NRPC for revised availability certificate for 
the transmission assets does not arise. [Paras 28-35, 37-39]
Case Law Cited
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Zuari Industries Limited 
[2009] 13 SCR 1101 : (2009) 9 SCC 70 – relied on.
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v. Renew Wind Energy (Rajkot) 
Private Limited [2023] 7 SCR 670 : 2023 SCC OnLine SC 411 – 
held inapplicable.
List of Acts
Electricity Act, 2003; Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998; 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and Conditions 
of Tariff) Regulations, 2004.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
125
Powergrid Corporation of India Limited v.  
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors.
List of Keywords
Electricity; Central transmission utility; Transmission systems; Inter-
State Transmission Systems; De-capitalization of transformers; 
Additional capitalization; Replacement for damaged transformers; 
Northern Regional Power Committee; Inter-connecting Transformers; 
Revision tariff; Self-insurance reserve policy; Fire risk; Machinery 
breakdown; Self-insurance reserve; Proximate cause; Revised 
availability certificate; Central Electricity Regulatory Commission; 
Cost of replacement of the damaged ICTs; Certificate for transmission 
assets; New/repaired transformers; Approval of transmission charges; 
Additional capital expenditure.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 5857-5858 
of 2011
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.03.2011 of the Appellate 
Tribunal for Electricity in Appeal Nos. 91-92 of 2009
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Ms. Swapna Seshadri, Pramod Dayal, Nikunj Dayal, Utkarsh Singh, 
Ms. Sneha Singh Baghel.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Pradeep Misra, Daleep Dhyani, Manoj Kumar Sharma.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Ujjal Bhuyan, J.
This order will dispose of both Civil Appeal Nos. 5857 and 5858 of 
2011.
2.	
Since both the civil appeals filed by the appellant under Section 
125 of the Electricity Act, 2003 arise out of the common order dated 
23.03.2011 passed by the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity in Appeal 
Nos. 91-92 of 2009 with the issue being inter-related and between 
the same parties, both the appeals were heard together and are 
being disposed of by this common order.
126
Supreme Court Reports
3.	
Appellant in this case is Powergrid Corporation of India Limited.
4.	
In Appeal No. 91 of 2009, the challenge made was to the order 
dated 03.02.2009 passed by the Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission in Petition No. 68 of 2008. In Appeal No. 92 of 2009, 
challenge made was to the order dated 03.02.2009 passed by the 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission in Petition No. 80/2008. 
Both Appeal Nos. 91 and 92 of 2009 were dismissed by the Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission vide the order dated 23.03.2011 
(impugned order).
5.	
Hence, the two appeals.
6.	
This Court by order dated 01.08.2011 had issued notice.
7.	
Relevant facts may be briefly noted.
8.	
Appellant Powergrid Corporation of India Limited (for short 
‘Powergrid’) is a public sector undertaking of the Government 
of India. It is mainly engaged in the business of transmission of 
power through its transmission network. It discharges its statutory 
functions under the Electricity Act, 2003 and transmits electricity 
throughout the country. On the other hand, respondent No. 1 is 
the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission. It is a statutory 
body established under the provisions of the erstwhile Electricity 
Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 (since repealed). After coming into 
force of the Electricity Act, 2003, the Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (‘CERC’ for short) began to exercise its functions 
under the said statute.
9.	
At the relevant point of time, appellant was a central transmission 
utility responsible for establishing transmission assets of Inter-
State Transmission Systems (‘ISTS’ for short) dealing with 
planning and transmission of electricity. Amongst others, appellant 
owned and operated two transmission systems in the northern 
region: Rihand I and Rihand II. Rihand I comprises of Mandola 
and Ballabgarh sub-stations whereas Rihand II comprises of 
Kaithal, Mainpuri and Abdullapur sub-stations. Rihand I had three 
Inter-connecting Transformers (‘ICT’ for short): one at Ballabgarh 
and two at Mandola. Rihand II had four ICTs: two at Kaithal and 
two at Mainpuri.
10.	 Between 28.04.2006 and 09.05.2006, all the three transformers in the 
Rihand I transmission system failed and broke down. In fact, those 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
127
Powergrid Corporation of India Limited v.  
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors.
were burnt and damaged due to internal faults. Considering that it 
was peak summer season with high anticipated load demand in the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi, the transformers were required to 
be replaced immediately. According to the appellant, procurement of 
new transformers would have taken a long time. Therefore, it was 
decided to temporarily take out one transformer each from Mainpuri 
and Kaithal sub-stations and to divert the same to Ballabgarh and 
Mandola. It was also decided to divert one transformer which was 
procured for Bahadurgarh sub-station to Mandola as commissioning 
at Bahadurgarh was scheduled later.
11.	 Accordingly, appellant restored the transformers at Ballabgarh and 
Mandola during the period from 29.05.2006 to 19.06.2006. The ICTs 
that were taken out from Mainpuri and Kaithal were restored by 
January and February, 2007 by new/repaired transformers.
12.	 Thereafter, appellant filed a petition before the CERC for approval 
of the transmission charges for the three replaced ICTs in Rihand I 
based on the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and 
Conditions of Tariff) Regulations, 2004 (referred to hereinafter as ‘the 
Tariff Regulations’). The said petition was registered as Petition No. 
68 of 2008. Appellant claimed de-capitalization for the transformers 
taken out from Mainpuri and Kaithal and additional capitalization for 
the new/repaired transformer originally procured for Bahadurgarh 
sub-station and installed at the two sub-stations of Mandola and 
Ballabgarh.
13.	 By order dated 03.02.2009, CERC did not allow the claim of the 
appellant and dismissed Petition No. 68 of 2008.
14.	 Aggrieved thereby, appellant preferred Appeal No. 91 of 2009 
before the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (‘Appellate Tribunal’ 
for short).
15.	 On 09.05.2006, the tariff for the Rihand transmission systems 
were determined by the CERC for the period from 01.04.2004 to 
02.04.2009. On 04.09.2008, appellant filed a petition before the 
CERC for revision of tariff in respect of the Rihand transmission 
system for the period upto 02.04.2009 considering the net additional 
capitalization on account of replacement of the three burnt ICTs at 
Mandola and Ballabgarh. Appellant also sought for a direction to 
the Northern Regional Power Committee for issuance of revised 
128
Supreme Court Reports
availability certificate excluding the period when the three ICTs were 
decapitalized and not in use. According to the appellant, an availability 
certificate was required for claiming full transmission charges and 
incentives. It was registered as Petition No. 80 of 2008.
16.	 CERC vide the order dated 03.02.2009 disallowed the claim of the 
appellant for decapitalization of the damaged transformers and 
recapitalization of the installed transformers as replacement for the 
damaged transformers. CERC further held that the net cost for such 
replacement has to be met out from the insurance fund reserve 
maintained by the appellant under the internal insurance policy for 
which contribution was being paid by the beneficiaries in the form 
of operations and maintenance expenses. Further, CERC also did 
not accede to the prayer of the appellant for giving directions to 
the Northern Regional Power Committee for issuance of revised 
availability certificate. Accordingly, vide the aforesaid order dated 
03.02.2009, Petition No. 80 of 2008 filed by the appellant was 
dismissed.
17.	 This led to filing of Appeal No. 92 of 2009 by the appellant before 
the Appellate Tribunal. Both the appeals were heard together 
by the Appellate Tribunal; and vide the impugned order dated 
23.03.2011 dismissed the two appeals as being devoid of merit.
18.	 Learned counsel for the appellant submits that Appellate Tribunal 
had virtually rubber stamped the findings arrived at by the 
CERC. That apart it had interpreted Regulation 53(2)(iv) and 
Note 2 of the Tariff Regulations in a most illogical manner. If 
this is the interpretation, then no transmission licensee will ever 
get additional capitalization on restoration and replacement of 
the ICTs. He also submits that interpretation of the Appellate 
Tribunal viz-a-viz the self-insurance policy is wholly illogical 
without appreciating that the fire had occurred as a result of 
the machinery breakdown and hence it is not covered under the 
self-insurance policy.
18.1.	 Because of such erroneous decision, appellant has been 
denied Rs. 15.63 crores on account of capitalization and Rs. 
4.58 crores on account of tariff qua Rihand I transmission 
system and Rs. 3.54 crores on account of capitalization qua 
Rihand II transmission system.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
129
Powergrid Corporation of India Limited v.  
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors.
18.2.	 He submits that in April-May, 2006, the three ICTs at Mandola 
and Ballabhgarh were damaged due to internal faults i.e. 
machinery breakdown which resulted in the burning of the ICTs. 
19.	 Learned counsel again referred to Regulation 53(2) of the Tariff 
Regulations and submits that any work that may be required to 
be done by a transmission licensee for successfully operating the 
transmission system is permissible expenditure for capitalization, 
whether it is a new work or a replacement. Any other interpretation 
would render the aforesaid provision particularly Note 2 meaningless. 
Contrary to this Appellate Tribunal has returned a finding that 
replacement of ICTs/transformers is neither an additional work 
necessary for efficient and successful operation nor an old asset 
requiring replacement. Such a finding is unsustainable.
19.1.	 It is further submitted that Appellate Tribunal was not justified 
in denying decapitalization and additional capitalization 
of the ICTs on the ground that it was the responsibility of 
the appellant for maintenance of the transmission system. 
Appellant’s decapitalization and capitalization were under the 
terms of accepted accounting practice. By not factoring in the 
said expenditure as additional capitalization for the value of 
the ICTs has led to a non-cost reflective tariff being paid to 
the appellant. Finding rendered by the Appellate Tribunal that 
provisions of Regulation 53 of the Tariff Regulations does not 
cover replacement of damaged ICTs/transformers is incorrect 
for the reason that any additional expenditure is contemplated 
to be an additional capitalization if it relates to the efficient and 
successful operation of the project. Regulation 53 cannot be 
interpreted in a narrow and pedantic manner.
19.2.	 Referring to the self-insurance policy of the appellant, 
learned counsel submits that the same covers losses from 
fire, whether it is internal or external or even if it is due to 
machinery breakdown. Fire was not the direct cause of the 
damage to the ICTs/transformers; rather it was machinery 
failure that possibly led to the fire. Learned counsel submits 
that if the fire had caused the machinery breakdown, the 
coverage will be available under the self-insurance policy 
as the proximate cause in such a case would be the fire. 
In this connection he has placed reliance on a decision of 
130
Supreme Court Reports
this Court in New India Assurance Company Limited Vs. 
Zuari Industries Limited1. He has also placed reliance on 
another decision of this Court in Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam 
Limited Vs. Renew Wind Energy (Rajkot) Private Limited2to 
contend that Appellate Tribunal virtually rubber stamped 
the decision of CERC.
20.	 On the other hand, learned counsel for some of the respondents i.e. 
respondent Nos.2 to 5 and 10, who are the beneficiaries, supported 
the order of CERC as well as that of the Appellate Tribunal. 
20.1.	 It is submitted that appellant under the statute is under an 
obligation to maintain a healthy transmission system. For 
maintenance of the transmission system, the beneficiaries 
are not required to pay additional amount. The very concept 
of additional capitalization is based on the premise that in 
case any additional benefit is given to the beneficiaries, the 
amount can be capitalized. It is contended that by replacement 
of the failed transformers no additional benefit is given to the 
beneficiaries. Hence, the amount claimed for replacement of 
the transformers cannot be capitalized.
20.2.	 Appellant had also shown a huge figure as cost of the installed 
transformers though such transformers were not new ones. 
Actual cost of the transformers would be much less. The 
differential amount cannot be capitalized.
20.3.	 Adverting to Regulation 53 of the Tariff Regulations, it is 
submitted that additional capitalization can be claimed only in 
respect of the works in the original scope of the project. That 
apart, additional capitalization can be claimed due to change 
in law or on account of any award passed in arbitration, decree 
of court, etc. Replacement of transformers does not fall in any 
of such categories. Hence, the amounts claimed in both the 
appeals cannot be capitalized.
20.4.	 The self-insurance reserve policy of the appellant covers 
unsecured risks. The policy does not say that it will not cover 
the risk regarding failure of transformers. If the appellant had 
1	
(2009) 9 SCC 70
2	
2023 SCC OnLine SC 411
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
131
Powergrid Corporation of India Limited v.  
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors.
not secured that risk in the policy, it cannot be allowed to 
penalise the beneficiaries. 
20.5.	 Learned counsel has also justified the decision of the Appellate 
Tribunal declining to issue directions to Northern Regional 
Power Committee (NRPC).
20.6.	 It is therefore submitted that there is no merit in the appeals 
which should be dismissed.
21.	 Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties have received 
the due consideration of the Court. 
22.	 Upon perusal of the materials on record and after hearing learned 
counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the following questions 
arise for our consideration in this case: 
1.	
Whether the Appellate Tribunal and respondent No.1 were 
justified in rejecting the claim made by the appellant of additional 
capitalization due to replacement of the damaged ICTs?
2.	
Whether the self-insurance policy of the appellant covered the 
cost of replacement of the damaged ICTs?
3.	
Whether the Member Secretary of NRPC should have been 
directed by the Appellate Tribunal to issue revised availability 
certificate for the transmission assets?
23.	 To consolidate all the laws relating to generation, transmission, 
distribution, trading and use of electricity and generally for taking 
measures conducive to development of the electricity industry, 
promoting competition therein, protecting the interest of consumers 
and supply of electricity to all areas, rationalization of electricity 
tariff, ensuring transparent policies regarding subsidies, promotion of 
efficient and environmentally benign policies, constitution of Central 
Electricity Authority, Regulatory Commissions and establishment 
of Appellate Tribunal and for such related matters, the Electricity 
Act has been enacted. Whether it is Appellate Tribunal traceable 
to Section 110 or the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(CERC) referred to in Section 76(1) or Central Transmission Utility 
meaning any government company which the Central Government 
may notify under sub-section (1) of Section 38, such as the appellant, 
all are covered by provisions of the Electricity Act. It also provides 
for appeal to the Supreme Court, as in the present case, under 
132
Supreme Court Reports
Section 125 against any decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal 
on a substantial question of law.
24.	 In exercise of the powers conferred under Section 178 of the Electricity 
Act and all other powers enabling in this behalf and after previous 
publication, CERC has made the Tariff Regulations which came into 
force on 01.04.2004. 
25.	 The scope and extent of application of the Tariff Regulations is 
provided in Regulation 2. As per clause (1), where tariff is determined 
through a transparent process of bidding in accordance with the 
guidelines issued by the Central Government, CERC shall adopt 
such tariff in accordance with the provisions of the Electricity Act. 
Clause (2) says that the Tariff Regulations shall apply in all such 
cases where tariff is to be determined by the CERC based on capital 
cost. Ofcourse, the CERC has the authority to prescribe relaxed 
norms of application for determination of tariff.
26.	 Chapter - 2 of the Tariff Regulations deals with thermal power 
generating stations. Regulations 14 and 18 are included in Chapter - 2.
26.1.	 Regulation 14(xviii) defines ‘Operation and Maintenance 
Expenses’ or O&M expenses to mean the expenditure 
incurred on operation and maintenance of the generating 
station including part thereof and includes the expenditure 
on manpower, repairs, spares, consumables, insurance and 
overhead.
26.2.	 Regulation 18 deals with additional capitalization. Regulation 
18 is extracted hereunder:
18. Additional capitalisation: (1) The following 
capital expenditure within the original scope of 
work actually incurred after the date of commercial 
operation and up to the cut off date may be admitted 
by the Commission, subject to prudence check: 
(i) Deferred liabilities;
(ii) Works deferred for execution;
(iii) Procurement of initial capital spares in 
the original scope of work, subject to ceiling 
specified in regulation 17;
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
133
Powergrid Corporation of India Limited v.  
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors.
(iv) Liabilities to meet award of arbitration or for 
compliance of the order or decree of a court; and 
(v) On account of change in law. 
Provided that original scope of work along with 
estimates of expenditure shall be submitted along 
with the application for provisional tariff. 
Provided further that a list of the deferred liabilities 
and works deferred for execution shall be submitted 
along with the application for final tariff after the date 
of commercial operation of the generating station. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of clause (3) of this 
regulation, the capital expenditure of the following 
nature actually incurred after the cut off date may 
be admitted by the Commission, subject to prudence 
check:
(i) Deferred liabilities relating to works/services 
within the original scope of work;
(ii) Liabilities to meet award of arbitration or for 
compliance of the order or decree of a court;
(iii) On account of change in law;
(iv) Any additional works/services which have 
become necessary for efficient and successful 
operation of the generating station, but not 
included in the original project cost; and
(v) Deferred works relating to ash pond or ash 
handling system in the original scope of work.
(3) Any expenditure on minor items/assets like normal 
tools and tackles, personal computers, furniture, 
air-conditioners, voltage stabilizers, refrigerators,  
fans, coolers, TV, washing machines, heat-
convectors, carpets, mattresses etc. brought after 
the cut off date shall not be considered for additional  
capitalisation for determination of tariff with effect 
from 1.4.2004. 
134
Supreme Court Reports
Note 
The list of items is illustrative and not exhaustive.
(4) Impact of additional capitalisation in tariff 
revision may be considered by the Commission 
twice in a tariff period, including revision of tariff 
after the cut off date. 
Note 1 
Any expenditure admitted on account of 
committed liabilities within the original scope 
of work and the expenditure deferred on 
techno-economic grounds but falling within 
the original scope of work shall be serviced 
in the normative debt-equity ratio specified in 
regulation 20. 
Note 2 
Any expenditure on replacement of old assets 
shall be considered after writing off the gross 
value of the original assets from the original 
project cost, except such items as are listed in 
clause (3) of this regulation. 
Note 3 
Any expenditure admitted by the Commission 
for determination of tariff on account of new 
works not in the original scope of work shall 
be serviced in the normative debt-equity ratio 
specified in regulation 20. 
Note 4 
Any expenditure admitted by the Commission 
for determination of tariff on renovation and 
modernization and life extension shall be 
serviced on normative debt-equity ratio specified 
in regulation 20 after writing off the original 
amount of the replaced assets from the original 
project cost.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
135
Powergrid Corporation of India Limited v.  
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors.
27.	 To answer question No.1, it is necessary to advert to Regulation 53 
of the Tariff Regulations which is included in Chapter - 4, the 
heading of which is Inter-State Transmission. Regulation 53 reads 
thus:
53. Additional capitalisation: (1) The following capital 
expenditure within the original scope of work actually 
incurred after the date of commercial operation and up 
to the cut off date may be admitted by the Commission, 
subject to prudence check:
(i) Deferred liabilities;
(ii) Works deferred for execution;
(iii) Procurement of initial capital spares in the original 
scope of works subject to the ceiling norm specified in 
regulation 52;
(iv) Liabilities to meet award of arbitration or compliance 
of the order or decree of a court; and 
(v) On account of change in law.
Provided that original scope of work along with estimates 
of expenditure shall be submitted along with the application 
for provisional tariff.
Provided further that a list of the deferred liabilities and 
works deferred for execution shall be submitted along with 
the application for final tariff after the date of commercial 
operation of the transmission system.
(2) Subject to the provisions of clause (3) of this regulation, 
the capital expenditure of the following nature actually 
incurred after the cut off date may be admitted by the 
Commission, subject to prudence check:
(i) Deferred liabilities relating to works/services within the 
original scope of work;
(ii) Liabilities to meet award of arbitration or compliance 
of the order or decree of a court;
(iii) On account of change in law; and 
136
Supreme Court Reports
(iv) Any additional works/services which have become 
necessary for efficient and successful operation of the 
project, but not included in the original project cost.
(3) Any expenditure on minor items/assets brought after 
the cut off date like tools and tackles, personal computers, 
furniture, air-conditioners, voltage stabilizers, refrigerators, 
coolers, fans, T.V., washing machine, heat-convectors, 
mattresses, carpets, etc shall not be considered for 
additional capitalisation for determination of tariff with 
effect from 1.4.2004.
Note
The list of items is illustrative and not exhaustive.
(4) Impact of additional capitalisation in tariff revision may 
be considered by the Commission twice in a tariff period, 
including revision of tariff after the cut off date.
Note 1
Any expenditure admitted on account of committed liabilities 
within the original scope of work and the expenditure 
deferred on techno-economic grounds but falling within the 
original scope of work shall be serviced in the normative 
debt-equity ratio specified in regulation 54.
Note 2
Any expenditure on replacement of old assets shall be 
considered after writing off the entire value of the original 
assets from the original capital cost.
28.	 From a perusal of the above, it is seen that Regulation 53 provides 
for additional capital expenditure incurred after the commercial 
operation date. It says that additional capital expenditure incurred 
after the commercial operation date and upto the cut-off-date may 
be admitted by the CERC if such expenditure relates to deferred 
liabilities, deferred works, procurement of initial spares (within 
specified norms), compliance with arbitral award or court order or 
change in law subject to submission of necessary documents and 
a prudent check. Post cut-off date, additional capitalization may 
still be allowed for similar liabilities and more importantly essential 
new works or services necessary for efficient project operation but 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
137
Powergrid Corporation of India Limited v.  
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors.
minor assets like furniture, computers or appliances are excluded. 
It also provides that expenditure on replacement of old assets shall 
be considered after the full value of the old asset is written off and 
the impact of additional capitalization on tariff can be considered 
by the CERC twice in a tariff period, including revision of tariff after 
the cut off date.
29.	 Thus, it is evident that Regulation 53 does not include within its scope 
replacement of ICTs due to damage or failure. Regulation 53(2)(iv) 
says that any additional work/services which have become necessary 
for the efficient and successful operation of the project but not included 
in the original project cost may be admitted by the CERC as additional 
capital expenditure. Contention of the appellant that such a provision 
would apply to it also does not appeal to the Court as all that the 
appellant had done was diversion and replacement of ICTs. This 
cannot be construed as doing any additional work/services. On the 
contrary, we concur with the contention of some of the respondents 
that as a central transmission utility, it was the duty of the appellant 
to maintain a healthy transmission system; replacement of damaged 
equipment(s) is part of operation and maintenance.
30.	 Insofar Note 2 to Regulation 53 is concerned, it says that any 
expenditure on replacement of old assets shall be considered 
after writing off the entire value of the original assets from the 
original capital cost. In this case, the transmission systems were in 
normal operational condition since those were commissioned. Both 
Rihand I and Rihand II cannot be considered as old assets as these 
were fairly new. There is nothing on record to show that prior to the 
breakdown of ICTs, the transmission systems were in bad shape or 
had started wearing out.
31.	 That being the position, the answer to question No.1 can only be in 
the affirmative, in favour of the respondents and against the appellant.
32.	 This brings us to the second question which is as to whether the 
self-insurance policy of the appellant covered the cost of replacement 
of the damaged ICTs.
33.	 In the fiscal year 1994-1995, appellant opted to adopt a self-insurance 
reserve policy based on its past experience and in alignment with 
industry practices. The decision was taken to allocate estimated 
appropriations in the accounts for future losses potentially arising 
138
Supreme Court Reports
out of uninsured risks, such as, machinery breakdown and fire risk 
of equipments in operational sub-stations. Consequently, a self-
insurance account was created. The reserve was created at the 
rate of 0.1 percent of the gross value of the fixed assets at the 
close of each year covering potential future losses from uninsured 
risks with the exception of those related to high voltage direct 
current valve halls and sub-stations. The insurance reserve covered 
losses caused by events such as fire including by way of lightning, 
explosion/implosion, bush fires etc. with such losses being adjusted 
against the insurance reserve as per CERC’s guidelines upon actual 
occurrence. We thus find that there are no inclusions or exclusions 
with regard to loss caused by ‘fire’ nor does it include any exception 
to loss caused by fire.
34.	 It is the contention of the appellant that it could not take finance 
from the self-insurance reserve as the cause of the loss to the ICTs 
was damage due to machinery breakdown leading to fire. It is not 
the fire itself which damaged the ICTs. We find such contention of 
the appellant to be contradictory.
35.	 Considering the above we are of the view that the loss caused to 
the appellant by fire, whether by way of implosion or by way of 
explosion, would be covered by the policy as it covered all fires 
which caused loss without any exception and as all the three ICTs 
were operating until those got burnt. Therefore, the loss was caused 
due to fire because of which the ICTs became damaged beyond 
immediate repair.
36.	 In Zuari Industries Limited (supra), this Court analyzed the expression 
‘proximate cause’. In that case there was a short-circuit in the main 
switchboard installed in the sub-station receiving electricity from 
the State Electricity Board. This resulted in a flashover producing 
overcurrents. The flashover and overcurrents generated excessive 
heat. The paint on the panel board was charred by the excessive 
heat producing smoke because of which the partition of the adjoining 
feeder developed a hole. The smoke travelled to the generator 
compartment where also there was short-circuit because of which 
the power tripped. As a result, the entire electricity supply to the plant 
stopped. Due to the stoppage of electric supply, supply of water/
stream to the waste heat boiler by the flue gases at high temperature 
continued to be fed into the boiler which resulted in damage to the 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
139
Powergrid Corporation of India Limited v.  
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission & Ors.
boiler. It was in that context that the court considered the question 
as to whether the flashover or the fire was the proximate cause of 
the damage in question. After a thorough analysis of the chain or 
sequence of events, this Court took the view that the proximate 
cause is not the cause which is nearest in point of time or place but 
the active and efficient cause that sets in motion a train or chain of 
event which brings about the ultimate result without the intervention 
of any other force working from an independent source. On that 
basis this Court held that the fire was the efficient and active cause 
of the damage. Had the fire not occurred, the damage also would 
not have occurred. There was no intervening agency which was an 
independent source of the damage. Therefore, this Court did not 
agree with the conclusion of the Surveyor that the fire was not the 
cause of the damage to the machinery of the claimant. 
37.	 Applying the above principle to the facts of the present case, it can 
be seen that the proximate cause for the damage to the ICTs is the 
implosion/explosion in the internal/external machinery of the ICTs 
which caused fire. All the three ICTs became unserviceable due 
to the fire and had to be replaced by the appellant. Appellant has 
admitted that preventive maintenance and checks were done from 
time to time prior to the incident and everything was going fine. It 
was only when the fire broke out and damaged the ICTs did the 
authorities concerned diverted other transformers for replacement 
of the damaged transformers. Thus, our answer to question No. 
2 would be that the self-insurance policy of the appellant covered 
the cost of replacement of the damaged ICTs. Therefore, Appellate 
Tribunal was justified in directing the appellant to finance the net cost 
from the self-insurance fund reserve as part of the operation and 
maintenance charges. Accordingly, question No. 2 stands answered 
in the affirmative and against the appellant.
38.	 Since we have decided question Nos.1 and 2 against the appellant, 
question No.3 has become redundant as decapitalization and 
additional capitalization of the replaced ICTs have not been 
allowed. Therefore, question of issuing direction to the Member-
Secretary, NRPC for issuance of revised availability certificate for 
the transmission assets does not arise.
39.	 Before parting with the record, we may refer to the decision of this 
Court in Gujarat Ujra Vikas Nigam Limited (supra) in which case 
140
Supreme Court Reports
this Court agreed with the appellant that there was not a shred of 
evidence adduced by the respondent beyond the bare allegation 
of coercion made against the appellant. It was in that context this 
Court expressed surprise as to how such a sweeping allegation of 
coercion was accepted by the Appellate Tribunal de hors adequate 
pleadings. Therefore, this Court opined that Appellate Tribunal had 
virtually rubber stamped the findings of Gujarat Electricity Regulatory 
Commission on coercion. Evidently, the above decision would have 
no application to the facts of the present case. That apart, Appellate 
Tribunal has given cogent and valid reasons while rejecting the 
appeals of the appellant. We, therefore, do not find any ground to 
interfere with the impugned order.
40.	 That being the position, we are of the considered opinion that the 
two appeals are devoid of any merit. Accordingly, the appeals are 
dismissed. No Cost.
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain