[2025] 5 S.C.R. 360 : 2025 INSC 432
The Management of Worth Trust 
v. 
The Secretary, Worth Trust Workers Union
(Civil Appeal No. 4717 of 2025)
02 April 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia* and K. Vinod Chandran, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as to whether the appellant-trust which is engaged in 
charitable and also commercial activities can be exempted under 
section 32 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 and thus, not liable 
to pay any bonus to its workmen.
Headnotes†
Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 – ss.10, 11, 32 – Factories Act, 
1948 – Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 – Appellant-trust was 
doing charitable activities and it was also engaged in industrial 
activities of commercial nature – Workmen employed by 
appellant-trust largely comprise of workers cured of leprosy 
and they had formed a union – Respondent-union raised 
the issue demanding bonus and ex-gratia for the year 1996-
97 – Tribunal held that respondent-union claim of bonus and 
ex-gratia was justified – Tribunal ordered that workmen were 
entitled to a bonus of 8.33% on their annual earnings and 
further held that they were entitled to an ex-gratia amount – 
The Single Judge of the High Court upheld the award of 
the Tribunal but modified the relief to the extent that bonus 
be awarded after deducting the amount already paid ex-
gratia – Writ appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed – 
Correctness:
Held: Workmen do not deny the fact that the appellant has been 
doing charitable work and they also admit that most of the workmen 
are the persons cured of leprosy who had been rehabilitated by 
the trust, but again it is a fact that these workmen are working in 
factories and fall within the definition of ‘workmen’ and ‘employee’ 
under the Factories Act, 1948 as well as the Bonus Act – Since, 
* Author
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
361
The Management of Worth Trust v.  
The Secretary, Worth Trust Workers Union
admittedly, they work in factories, the Bonus Act is applicable in their 
case, as are all other beneficial legislations such as the Factories 
Act, Employees’ State Insurance Act, Employees Provident Fund 
Act etc. – Just because factories run by the appellant come under 
the broad umbrella of the appellant-trust, which is also involved in 
some charitable work, the workers cannot be deprived of the benefit 
of the Bonus Act – Workmen of the respondent-Union are liable 
to receive their bonus under the Payment of Bonus Act – Though 
appellant has been already paying some amount, which is called 
ex-gratia, as a measure of charity to the workmen – However, same 
cannot be ground to avoid paying a bonus, which is a statutory 
duty and right of the appellant and workmen respectively – Thus, 
appellant is not exempted u/s. 32(v)(a) or (c) of the Bonus Act, 
and the workmen of the respondent-Union, who are engaged 
by the appellant in its factories, are entitled to get the bonus in 
accordance with law. [Paras 14, 16, 17, 19]
Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 – Statement of objects and 
reasons – Scheme and applicability – Discussed. [Para 7]
List of Acts
Payment of Bonus Act, 1965; Factories Act, 1948; Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947.
List of Keywords
Section 32 of Payment of Bonus Act, 1965; Workshop for 
Rehabilitation and Training of the Handicapped Trust’ (WORTH); 
Swedish Red Cross Society; Charitable activities; Rehabilitation 
of leprosy-cured patients; Commercial activities; WORTH 
Trust Workers Union; Claim of bonus and ex-gratia; Scheme 
and applicability of the Bonus Act; Indian Red Cross Society; 
Institution of a like nature; Payment of bonus; Established not for 
the purposes of profit; Statutory duty and right of the appellant 
and workmen.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4717 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.03.2019 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras in WA No. 1732 of 2013
362
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
R. Anand Padmanabhan, Sr. Adv., Arimardhan Sharma, Ms. Ruchi 
Arya, Shashi Bhushan Kumar.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Gautam Narayan, Sr. Adv., Ms. Asmita Singh, Abheet Mangleek, 
Tushar Nair, Anirudh Anand, Punishk Handa.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sudhanshu Dhulia, J. 
1.	
Leave granted. 
2.	
The appellant before this Court is a trust presently known as 
‘Workshop for Rehabilitation and Training of the Handicapped 
Trust’, or ‘WORTH’. Prior to the year 1985, the name of this trust 
was ‘Swedish Red Cross Rehabilitation Trust’ as it was initially 
established by the Swedish Red Cross Society. This trust has been 
doing charitable activities, including the rehabilitation of leprosy-cured 
patients and other specially abled persons. 
3.	
For our purpose, it is an admitted fact that since 1985, the trust is 
also engaged in many industrial activities which are in the nature of 
commercial activities, such as the manufacture of automobile parts 
and parts for industrial machineries. This is purely a commercial 
venture, and it is again an admitted fact that from the manufacturing 
and sale of these parts, which is done in its factories, profits are being 
generated. These profits, for our purposes and for the purpose of the 
Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (hereinafter ‘Bonus Act’), are known 
as ‘surplus’. Thus, though the factory may be under the control of a 
trust, but it is also governed under the Factories Act, 1948. 
4.	
It is again an admitted fact that the workmen who are employed in 
the factories in various capacities largely comprise of such workers 
who have been cured of Leprosy or are otherwise differently abled. 
These workmen have a union known as “WORTH Trust Workers 
Union” (hereinafter referred to as ‘Union’). In the year 1998, this 
Union raised an industrial dispute demanding bonus and ex-gratia 
for the year 1996-97 and ultimately, the dispute was referred to the 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
363
The Management of Worth Trust v.  
The Secretary, Worth Trust Workers Union
Industrial Disputes Tribunal, Chennai as per Section 10(2) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 read with Section 22 of the Bonus 
Act. The claim of the workmen union was based on the fact that its 
members are workmen who are working in the factories governed 
by the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948 and Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 and thus, the Payment of Bonus Act1 is applicable to them. 
5.	
Before the Tribunal, the Respondent-Union claimed a bonus at the 
rate of 20% and ex-gratia at the rate of 5% on the annual earning 
of a worker. The Tribunal partly allowed the claim of workmen and 
held that workmen’s demand for bonus and ex-gratia is justified. 
Tribunal ordered that workmen are entitled to a bonus of 8.33 % on 
their annual earnings and further, the Tribunal also held that workmen 
are entitled to an ex-gratia amount, which they have already been 
receiving from the appellant. This award was challenged before the 
High Court by the appellant. The learned Single Judge bench upheld 
the award of the Tribunal but modified the relief to the extent that the 
bonus shall be awarded after deducting the amount already paid as 
ex-gratia. Thereafter, the Writ Appeal, filed by appellant challenging the 
findings of the Single Judge, was also dismissed vide the impugned 
order dated 20.03.2019. Aggrieved, the appellant is before us.
6.	
We have heard both sides and perused the material on record.
7.	
Let us first understand the scheme and applicability of the Bonus 
Act. The practice of paying bonus in India originated during the First 
World War when some textile mills started giving bonus to their 
workers under the Defence of India Rules. Later in 1960, at the 
meetings of the Eighteenth Session of the standing Labour Committee 
of the Government of India, it was agreed that a Commission be 
appointed to evolve norms for payment of bonus. Consequently, a 
Bonus Commission was appointed and thereafter, the Government 
of India promulgated an Ordinance accepting recommendations of 
the Bonus Commission with some modification. This ordinance was 
later replaced by the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965. In this regard, the 
Statement of Object and Reasons of the Bonus Act states as follows:
1	
Section 1(3)(a) of the Payment of Bonus Act makes the Act applicable to every factory. It reads as 
follows:
Section 1: Short title, extent and application- 
(1)  …..
(2)  …..
(3)  …..it shall apply to-
(a) every factory;… 
364
Supreme Court Reports
“Statement of Objects and Reasons.—A Tripartite 
Commission was set up by the Government of India by their 
Resolution No. WB-20(9)/61, dated 6th December, 1961, 
to consider in a comprehensive manner, the question of 
payment of bonus based on profits to employees employed 
in establishments and to make recommendations to the 
Government. The Commission’s Report containing their 
recommendations was received by the Government on 24th 
January, 1964. In their Resolution No. WB˜20(3)/64, dated 
the 2nd September, 1964, the Government announced 
acceptance of the Commission’s recommendations subject 
to a few modifications as were, mentioned therein. With a 
view to implement the recommendations of the Commission 
as accepted by the Government, the Payment of Bonus 
Ordinance, 1965, was promulgated on 29th May, 1965. 
The object of the Bill is to replace the said Ordinance.” 
8.	
As already discussed above, Section 1(3)(a) of the Bonus Act makes 
the Bonus Act applicable to all the factories. The term ‘factory’ is 
defined under Section 2(17) of the Bonus Act as follows:
“(17) “factory” shall have the same meaning as in clause 
(m) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948;”
Clause (m) of Section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 reads as follows:
“(m) “factory” means any premises including the precincts 
thereof—
(i)	
whereon ten or more workers are working, or were 
working on any day of the preceding twelve months, 
and in any part of which a manufacturing process is 
being carried on with the aid of power, or is ordinarily 
so carried on, or
(ii)	
whereon twenty or more workers are working, or 
were working on any day of the preceding twelve 
months, and in any part of which a manufacturing 
process is being carried on without the aid of power, 
or is ordinarily so carried on,—
but does not include a mine subject to the operation 
of  the  Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952), or  a mobile unit 
belonging to the armed forces of the Union, a railway 
running shed or a hotel, restaurant or eating place;
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
365
The Management of Worth Trust v.  
The Secretary, Worth Trust Workers Union
Explanation [I]—For computing the number of workers 
for the purposes of this clause all the workers in different 
groups and relays] in a day shall be taken into account;]
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this clause, the mere 
fact that an Electronic Data Processing Unit or a Computer 
Unit is installed in any premises or part thereof, shall not be 
construed to make it a factory if no manufacturing process 
is being carried on in such premises or part thereof;
9.	
The payment of minimum and maximum bonuses is made as per 
Sections 10 and 11 of the Bonus Act. These provisions read as follows: 
10. Payment of minimum bonus.—Subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, every employer shall be bound to 
pay to every employee in respect of the accounting year 
commencing on any day in the year 1979 and in respect 
of every subsequent accounting year, a minimum bonus 
which shall be 8.33 per cent. of the salary of wage earned 
by the employee during the accounting year or one hundred 
rupees, whichever is higher, whether or not the employer 
has any allocable surplus in the accounting year:
Provided that where an employee has not completed fifteen 
years of age at the beginning of the accounting year, the 
provisions of this section shall have effect in relation to 
such employees as if for the words “one hundred rupees”, 
the words “sixty rupees” were substituted.
11. Payment of maximum bonus- (1) Where in respect of 
any accounting year referred to in Section 10, the allocable 
surplus exceeds the amount of minimum bonus payable 
to the employees under that section, the employer shall, 
in lieu of such minimum bonus, be bound to pay to every 
employee in respect of that accounting year bonus which 
shall be an amount in proportion to the salary or wage 
earned by the employee during the accounting year subject 
to a maximum of twenty per cent of such salary or wage.
(2) In computing the allocable surplus under this section, the 
amount set on or the amount set off under the provisions 
of Section 15 shall be taken into account in accordance 
with the provisions of that section.
366
Supreme Court Reports
10.	 The workmen of the Respondent-Union argued that they are engaged 
in manufacturing activities and are working in factories run by the 
appellant, and thus, in terms of the above provisions of the Bonus 
Act, they are entitled to the payment of a bonus. The workmen had 
demanded a maximum bonus of 20% of their annual earnings as 
per section 11 of the Bonus Act. 
11.	 Under Section 32, the Bonus Act is not made applicable to a certain 
class of employees. The appellant has consistently taken the defence 
that it is exempted under Section 32(v)(a) and (c) of the Bonus Act, 
and thus, not liable to pay any bonus. The relevant portion of Section 
32 of the Bonus Act reads as follows:
“32. Act not to apply to certain classes of employees.—
Nothing in this Act shall apply to— 
…
…
(v) employees employed by— 
(a) the Indian Red Cross Society or any other 
institution of a like nature (including its branches); 
…
(c) institutions (including hospitals, chambers of 
commerce and social welfare institutions) established 
not for purposes of profit..
12.	 The argument of the appellant before the Tribunal and before all other 
Courts including this Court therefore is that the Bonus Act does not 
apply as its employees are to be treated as employees of ‘the Indian 
Red Cross Society’ and if not, then they have to be treated as the 
employees of an ‘institution of a like nature’, which is like Indian Red 
Cross Society, and thus, exempted from payment of bonus in terms 
of Section 32(v)(a) of the Bonus Act. In the alternative, the appellant 
also argued that it can be treated as an institution which has been 
‘established not for the purposes of profit’ and thus, exempted as 
per Section 32(v)(c) of the Bonus Act. 
13.	 After taking evidence from both sides, the Tribunal came to the 
conclusion that though trust was established in 1969 as ‘Swedish Red 
Cross Rehabilitation Trust’ with the charitable object of rehabilitation 
of former leprosy patients or other persons with disabilities, but since 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
367
The Management of Worth Trust v.  
The Secretary, Worth Trust Workers Union
the year 1985 there has been a marked shift in the activities of 
the trust. Not only did the name of the trust change from ‘Swedish 
Red Cross Rehabilitation Trust’ to ‘Workshop for Rehabilitation & 
Training of the Handicapped’ (‘WORTH’), but the very object of the 
trust also got diluted and its work was expanded since appellant 
started commercial activities at a greater scale. These commercial 
activities include the manufacturing and sale of certain automobile 
parts and other types of equipment. The factories make a profit, 
which is called surplus, though this profit is allegedly again invested 
in similar rehabilitation activities which the trust has been doing. 
14.	 The workmen do not deny the fact that the appellant has been doing 
charitable work and they also admit that most of the workmen are the 
persons cured of leprosy who had been rehabilitated by the trust, but 
again it is a fact that these workmen are working in factories and fall 
within the definition of ‘workmen’ and ‘employee’ under the Factories 
Act, 1948 as well as the Bonus Act. Since, admittedly, they work in 
factories, the Bonus Act is applicable in their case, as are all other 
beneficial legislations such as the Factories Act, Employees’ State 
Insurance Act, Employees Provident Fund Act etc.
15.	 The appellant’s contention that it is exempted under Section 32(v) of 
the Bonus Act is without any merit, and the Tribunal rightly observed 
that there is no evidence to show that the appellant-trust is run by 
Indian Red Cross Society or that the appellant is an institution similar 
to Indian Red Cross Society. Nor can it be said that appellant is an 
institution exempted under section 32(v)(c) of the Bonus Act. The 
learned Single Judge of the High Court also noted that since the 
year 1985, appellant has been engaged in commercial activities, 
and it is not dependent upon the Red Cross Society.
16.	 The Division Bench of the High Court, in its well-reasoned order, has 
elaborated on this aspect. The Division Bench rightly observed that 
the appellant had severed all its links with the Swedish Red Cross 
Society by deleting all references to Swedish Red Cross Society from 
the trust deed via an amendment in 1989. Further, there is nothing 
on record to show that the appellant is akin to the Indian Red Cross 
Society, which was established by an Act of Parliament. Some objects 
and activities of the appellant might match with that of the Indian 
Red Cross Society but that would not be enough to hold that the 
appellant is an institution like the Indian Red Cross Society. Moreover, 
when it is established that the appellant is running factories, then 
368
Supreme Court Reports
there can be no doubt regarding the applicability of the Bonus Act. 
Just because such factories come under the broad umbrella of the 
appellant-trust, which is also involved in some charitable work, the 
workers cannot be deprived of the benefit of the Bonus Act. In our 
view, workmen of the respondent-Union, who are presently before 
us, are liable to receive their bonus under the Payment of Bonus Act. 
17.	 The Appellant has submitted that it has already been paying some 
amount, which is called ex-gratia, as a measure of charity to the 
workmen and this fact has also been admitted by the respondent-
union. However, by no stretch of argument can this be a ground 
to avoid paying a bonus, which is a statutory duty and right of the 
appellant and workmen respectively. 
18.	 The Tribunal had awarded the minimum bonus to the workmen i.e., 
8.33 % of the annual earnings and when this award was challenged 
by the appellant before the High Court, the learned Single Judge 
dismissed the challenge with a slight modification that bonus shall be 
paid after deducting the amount of ex-gratia already paid to workmen. 
This order of the Single Judge directing adjustment of the amount of 
ex gratia against the bonus was never challenged by the workmen.
19.	 We hold that the appellant is not exempted under section 32(v)(a) 
or (c) of the Bonus Act, and the workmen of the respondent-Union, 
who are engaged by the appellant in its factories, are entitled to 
get the bonus in accordance with law. Therefore, the appellant is 
directed to pay bonus to its workmen, as per provisions of the Bonus 
Act, from the year 1996-1997 till date. This must be done within a 
month of this order.
20.	 The appeal stands dismissed in the above terms.
21.	 Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
22.	 Interim order(s), if any, stand(s) vacated. 
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan