[2025] 7 S.C.R. 307 : 2025 INSC 795
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased  
Through LRs. 
A1: Bhagirathibai 
A2: Ashabai 
A3: Bhaussaheb 
A4: Meenabai 
v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors. 
R1: Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne 
R2: Ashok 
R3: Chhaya Babasaheb Gadhe 
R4: Nareshkumar Babasaheb Gadhe 
R5: Balasaheb
(Civil Appeal No. 7277 of 2025)
02 June 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia and Ahsanuddin Amanullah,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the conveyance of the suit land by the original plaintiff 
dated 02.11.1971 in favour of defendant no.1 could have been 
done and, the same having been done, could be sustained in law; 
whether the subsequent release of the charge created on the suit 
land by the Society upon receiving the entire dues having been 
paid by the plaintiff, would give retrospectivity to the said release 
so as to validate and ratify the Sale Deeds dated 02.11.1971 and 
15.07.1972; against whom or between whom, if at all, any alienation 
under Section 48(e), Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 
is applicable for the said acts resulting in the same being void.
Headnotes†
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 – s.48(e) – 
Plaintiff, a member of the Co-operative Society obtained a loan 
from the Society and created a charge on his ancestral property 
(the suit land) in favour of the Society – Later, plaintiff also 
obtained loan from defendant no.1 and executed a Registered 
Sale Deed dated 02.11.1971 of the suit land in his favour and 
defendant no.1 executed a re-conveyance deed – However, 
defendant no.1 executed a Registered Sale Deed in favour 
* Author
308
Supreme Court Reports
of defendant no.2 in respect of certain portion of the suit 
land – Plaintiff sought possession and re-conveyance of the 
suit land – Trial Court declared sale deed dated 02.11.1971 as 
void u/s.48 and ordered re-conveyance of suit land in favour 
of plaintiff – Eventually, Single Judge set aside the decree 
of possession and dismissed the plaintiff’s suit – Appeal 
dismissed by Division Bench – Challenge to: 
Held: s.48(e) declares void any transaction by a member-loanee 
against the society, where he/she alienates such immovable 
property on which a charge is created under declaration – 
Alienation of any such property on which a charge is created in 
favour of the concerned co-operative society by way of declaration 
is beyond the capacity of the owner/member who has declared 
it as a charged property, until the amount, for which the charge 
was created along with the interest, is repaid in full – However, 
even if a part of the amount due is paid then the society may, on 
an application moved by the member, release from charge such 
part of the property, as it may deem proper having regard to the 
outstanding amount – The right to sue or get a declaration qua 
any alienation made by a loanee is available only to the society in 
favour of whom the property under a declaration was charged – 
Thus, with regard to a transaction, unless the society comes 
forward to seek its nullification/setting aside, the same would be 
a voidable action and not void ab initio – Neither the amount for 
which the charge was created was repaid to the Society either in 
full or in part nor any such application for part-release was either 
filed before or accepted by the Society prior to the sale deed dated 
02.11.1971 in favour of defendant no.1 – The Society had itself 
resolved to release the charge on the suit land on 27.08.1973 – It 
never moved before any forum for enforcing its charge over the 
suit land or raised any grievance w.r.t either of the Sale Deeds – 
Plaintiff cannot be allowed to benefit from his own wrong – Single 
Judge and the Division Bench committed no error – No merit in 
the appeal. [Paras 20-22, 24, 25, 32-34]
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 – s.48(e), 
directory:
Held: s.48(e) which says that any alienation made in contravention 
of the provisions of clause (d) shall be void has to be read as 
directory to the extent that the same can be acted upon only at 
the instance of the party aggrieved (viz. the society concerned) 
upon whom the right has been created under the statute. [Para 25]
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
309
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased Through LRs. v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors.
Case Law Cited
C S Venkatesh v. A S C Murthy [2020] 2 SCR 676 : (2020) 3 
SCC 280; State of Rajasthan v. Shiv Dayal [2019] 10 SCR 243 : 
(2019) 8 SCC 637; Sindav Hari Ranchhod v. Jadev Lalji Jaymal 
[1997] Supp. 3 SCR 41 : (1997) 7 SCC 95; Dhurandhar Prasad 
Singh v. Jai Prakash University [2001] 3 SCR 1129 : (2001) 6 
SCC 534; Ram Pyare v. Ram Narain [1985] 2 SCR 918 : (1985) 
2 SCC 162; Kusheshwar Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar [2007] 4 
SCR 95 : (2007) 11 SCC 447 – referred to.
List of Acts
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960; Prevention of 
Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1947.
List of Keywords
Alienation under Section 48(e) of the Maharashtra Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1960; Co-operative Society; Member of the Co-
operative Society; Member-loanee; Charge created on immovable 
property under declaration; Charge created on ancestral property; 
Charge on the suit land; Charge created on ancestral property (the 
suit land) in favour of the Co-operative Society; Release of the 
charge created on the suit land; Alienation of charged property; 
Conveyance of the suit land; Re-conveyance deed; Sale deed; 
Loan obtained from the Society; Kendal Bk. Vividh Karyakari Seva 
Sahakari Sanstha Limited; Decree of possession; Possession and 
re-conveyance of suit land; Bonafide purchase; Benefit from own 
wrong; Voidable action; Not void ab initio; Directory; Ex injuria sua 
nemo habere debet.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 7277 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 15.01.2019 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay at Aurangabad in LPA No. 33 of 1998
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Sandeep Sudhakar Deshmukh, Nishant Sharma, Ankur S. 
Savadikar.
310
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Ahsanuddin Amanullah, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeal impugns the Final Judgment and Order dated 
15.01.20191 in Letters Patent Appeal (hereinafter abbreviated as 
‘LPA’) No.33/1998 in First Appeal No.624/1992 (hereinafter referred 
to as the ‘Impugned Order’) passed by the High Court of Judicature 
at Bombay, Bench at Aurangabad (hereinafter referred to as the 
‘High Court’), whereby the appeal preferred by the appellants was 
dismissed and Judgment and Order dated 17.09.1993 [1994 MhLJ 
558] in First Appeal No.624/1992 passed by the learned Single 
Judge of the High Court was affirmed. The learned Single Judge 
differed with the Judgment and Order dated 27.03.1980 in Special 
Civil Suit No.49/1973 passed by the learned Civil Judge, Senior 
Division, Ahmednagar (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Trial Court’) 
and set aside the decree of possession so granted by the Trial Court.
PARTIES:
3.	
The appellants before us, along with respondent no.5, are the 
Legal Representatives (hereinafter abbreviated to ‘LRs’) of the 
original plaintiff. Respondent no.1 is the original defendant no.1 and 
respondents no.2 to 4 are the LRs of the original defendant no.2. 
Despite valid service of notice, no one has entered appearance on 
behalf of respondents no.1, 2, and 5. Though, when the matter was 
heard and judgment was reserved by this Court, learned counsel for 
respondents no.3 and 4 was not present, however, subsequently, in 
terms of the Order dated 17.12.2024, a note of written submissions 
has been filed on their behalf, which is taken on record.
FACTUAL MATRIX:
4.	
For the sake of convenience and clarity of facts, the parties shall be 
referred to as per their status/position in the suit. The suit property is 
1	
Cause Title corrected by the High Court vide Speaking to Minutes Order dated 11.09.2019.
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
311
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased Through LRs. v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors.
agricultural land bearing Survey No.30 situated at Village Kendal Bk., 
Taluka Rahuri, Ahmednagar, Maharashtra admeasuring 15 Acres and 
17 Guntha (hereinafter referred to as the ‘suit land’). The suit land 
was the ancestral property of the original plaintiff-Machhindranath. 
On 20.04.1956, the plaintiff enrolled as a member of the Kendal Bk. 
Vividh Karyakari Seva Sahakari Sanstha Limited (hereinafter referred 
to as the ‘Society’), which, admittedly, is a registered Co-operative 
Society in terms of the provisions of the Maharashtra Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’). Thereafter, 
the plaintiff obtained a loan from the Society, which was to be repaid 
by 09.11.1971, and created a charge on the suit land in favour of 
the Society. A declaration to this effect was made by the plaintiff on 
15.08.1969 and subsequently, Mutation Entry no.3346 came to be 
recorded on 09.09.1969 mentioning this declaration.
5.	
As things stood, the plaintiff found himself in a financial crunch 
and approached defendant no.1 for a loan of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees 
Five Thousand). Defendant no.1 was none other than the plaintiff’s 
nephew as also his son-in-law. Defendant no.1 extended such 
loan and as security, the plaintiff executed a Registered Sale Deed 
dated 02.11.1971 of the suit land in his favour. On the same day, a 
document styled as ‘Ram Ram Patra’ (hereinafter referred to as the 
‘Reconveyance Deed’) was executed by defendant no.1 mentioning 
that the total value of suit land is around Rs.25,000/- (Rupees 
Twenty-Five Thousand) and that he would re-convey the suit land 
on repayment of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand). Mutation Entry 
no.3520 came to be recorded in the name of defendant no.1 qua 
the suit land on 24.12.1971.
6.	
On 15.07.1972, defendant no.1 executed a Registered Sale Deed 
in favour of defendant no.2 in respect of 10 Acres of the suit land 
for a consideration of Rs.30,000/- (Rupees Thirty Thousand). As a 
consequence of the said Sale Deed dated 15.07.1972, Survey No.30 
came to be divided in two parts. The land sold to defendant no.2 was 
Survey No.30/1 and the remaining portion became Survey No.30/2. 
On knowledge of the Sale Deed executed by defendant no.1 in 
favour of defendant no.2, the plaintiff approached the Trial Court on 
28.02.1973 by filing Special Civil Suit No.49/1973 seeking possession 
of Survey Nos.30/1 and 30/2 and a direction for re-conveyance of 
the same along with mesne profits. After the institution of the suit, 
312
Supreme Court Reports
defendant no.2 filed an application to the Society to strike off its charge 
on the suit land. Vide a Resolution dated 03.04.1973, the Society 
resolved that the charge would be struck off only after a compromise 
takes place in respect of the land. However, subsequently, by a 
Resolution dated 27.08.1973 passed by the Society, the suit land 
came to be released by the Society from its charge, on account of 
repayment of the loan by the plaintiff.
7.	
After considering the evidence placed on record by the parties, 
the Trial Court held, vide Order dated 27.03.1980, that the Sale 
Deed dated 02.11.1971 was void under Section 48 of the Act and 
that defendant no.2 had failed to prove that he was a bonafide 
purchaser for value without notice. However, on the question of 
bar under the Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of 
Holdings Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Fragmentation 
Act’), the Trial Court found that the alienation was in pursuance of 
the Certificate granted under the Fragmentation Act. In the result, 
Trial Court passed a decree for possession of the suit land with 
direction to defendant no.1 to execute the deed of reconveyance 
of the suit land in favour of the plaintiff after receiving Rs.5,000/- 
(Rupees Five Thousand) from him.
8.	
Against the decree supra, defendant no.2 initially approached 
the High Court of Judicature at Bombay by filing First Appeal 
No.457/1980, which was later transferred to the Aurangabad Bench 
and re-numbered First Appeal No.624/1992. The learned Single 
Judge vide Order dated 14.10.1988 remanded the matter to the 
Trial Court, by framing four additional issues. On remand, the 
Trial Court considered the four issues with fresh evidence of the 
parties, and vide Order dated 28.04.1989 found that the Society 
was a registered resource society having majority of its members 
as agriculturists and that the Society was sub-classified as service 
resource society. After receipt of the decision of the Trial Court 
on the four additional issues, the learned Single Judge dismissed 
the appeal and confirmed the decree of possession. Against this, 
defendant no.2 filed LPA No.1/1990, which was allowed by a Division 
Bench and the matter was remanded to the learned Single Judge 
for fresh reconsideration on all issues. Pursuant thereto, the learned 
Single Judge reconsidered the evidence and allowed the first appeal 
thereby setting aside the decree of possession and dismissing 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
313
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased Through LRs. v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors.
the suit brought by the plaintiff. Aggrieved by these findings, the 
original plaintiff (predecessor-in-interest of the appellants) filed LPA 
No.33/1998 before the Division Bench, dismissal whereof has been 
occasioned vide the Impugned Order.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANTS:
9.	
Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the mandate of 
Section 47(2) of the Act very specifically creates an embargo on 
transfer of land in any manner without previous sanction/permission 
of the Society and as per Section 47(3) of the Act, transfer made in 
contravention of sub-section (2) is void. Further, the charge of Society 
was recorded in accordance with Section 48(a) and Section 48(d) of 
the Act again creates an embargo from alienating the whole or any 
part of the land specified in the declaration submitted while creating 
charge under Section 48(a) and further, Section 48(e) declares such 
alienations in contravention of Section 48(d) as void. Admittedly, the 
Sale Deed executed on 15.07.1972 by original defendant no.1 in 
favour of defendant no.2, is without any such sanction and therefore 
void in terms of Sections 47(3) and 48(e) of the Act. It was canvassed 
that the subsequent removal of charge by the Resolution dated 
27.08.1973 is inconsequential.
10.	 It was pointed out that defendant no.1 had not contested the suit. 
It was only the subsequent purchaser/defendant no.2 who did so. 
Admittedly, defendant no.2 had no presence at the time of the 
execution of the Registered Sale Deed dated 02.11.1971 or the 
reconveyance deed of even date executed between the plaintiff 
and defendant no.1. Therefore, defendant no.2 cannot falsify the 
Sale Deed dated 02.11.1971 and his case had to be limited to that 
of a bonafide purchaser for value without notice. The Trial Court 
specifically observed, on perusal of substantial evidence, that the 
plaintiff had proved the true nature of the transaction executed on 
02.11.1971 and that defendant no.2 was not a bonafide purchaser 
on account of the series of admissions extracted from him during 
cross-examination.
11.	 The learned Single Judge, on remand, had set aside the decree by 
interpreting Sections 47 and 48 of the Act. The evidence of Narsing 
Sonar (Assistant Registrar, Co-Operative Societies at Rahuri), 
Karbhari Shete (Chief Secretary of the Society) and Ram Krishna 
314
Supreme Court Reports
Hapse (Secretary of the Society) has been accepted which proves 
existence of charge on the date when the Sale Deed dated 15.07.1972 
was executed inter-se the defendants. Although the learned Single 
Judge observed that the cooperative societies mentioned in Section 
48 of the Act must be protected against defaults in the matter of 
recoveries, however, significance is given to the release of charge 
dated 27.08.1973 and it was held that such release would impliedly 
restore status quo ante, which is legally impermissible.
12.	 It was submitted that the specific finding of the Trial Court recorded 
in order dated 27.03.1980 at Paragraph 15 pertaining to defendant 
no.2 not being bonafide purchaser for value without notice, has not 
been disturbed. This finding had remained unchallenged for absence 
of any ground in the appeal. Further, findings about the validity of 
the Sale Deed dated 02.11.1971 had attained finality as they had 
not been challenged by defendant no.1. The Impugned Order, it 
was submitted, committed an error in concurring with the learned 
Single Judge to hold that since the suit land was released from the 
charge of the Society on 27.08.1973, the same would validate the 
Sale Deed dated 15.07.1972. It was vehemently argued that the 
patent error committed by the Impugned Order is in not considering 
that the prior permissions contemplated under Sections 47 and 48 of 
the Act were required on the date of the Sale Deed i.e. 15.07.1972 
and subsequent release of charge would not have any retrospective 
effect as such post-facto approval is not contemplated in the Act, 
and thus, is inconsequential.
13.	 With regard to the Sale Deed dated 02.11.1971, it was submitted 
that same will have to be appreciated based on the surrounding 
circumstances which would include not only the Reconveyance Deed 
dated 02.11.1971 but also the act of creating charge by Mutation 
Entry no.3520 on 24.12.1971, which was in teeth of the declaration 
submitted by plaintiff in terms of Section 48(a) of the Act and the 
evidence of the office-bearers of the Society. More so for on that 
date under Mutation Entry No. 3346 dated 09.09.1969, the name 
of the Society was already mutated with regard to the suit land, but 
the said Society was neither noticed nor its consent was taken. On 
consideration of the aforesaid facts, it will be crystalized that the true 
nature of the Sale Deed dated 02.11.1971 is that of a conditional 
sale. Reliance was placed on Paragraphs 13, 14 & 21-24 of the 
decision in C S Venkatesh v A S C Murthy, (2020) 3 SCC 280.
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
315
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased Through LRs. v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors.
14.	 Lastly, it was submitted that concurrent finding of fact has never 
been an embargo against the power of judicial review in the nature 
of Article 136 of the Constitution of India, which in fact invokes the 
concept of extraordinary civil appellate jurisdiction and the same has 
been appreciated and reiterated by this Court from time to time and 
recently in State of Rajasthan v Shiv Dayal, (2019) 8 SCC 637 
wherein it was held that concurrent findings can always be interfered 
with, when it is pointed out that the finding of fact in question is 
de hors the pleadings and a misinterpretation of the material on 
record. On these grounds, learned counsel prayed that the appeal 
be allowed and for restoration of the Judgment and Order passed 
by the Trial Court.
SUBMISSIONS BY RESPONDENTS NO.3 AND 4:
15.	 Learned counsel for the respondents no.3 and 4 submitted that 
the Impugned Order rightly considered provisions of the law and 
dismissed the plaintiff’s suit. The plaintiff failed to prove that the sale 
transaction between himself and defendant no.1 was a contract or 
reconveyance or loan transaction. Further, the plaintiff was conscious 
and aware about the charge of the Society and having still entered 
into the Sale Deed dated 02.11.1971 with defendant no.1, cannot be 
allowed to take the benefit of his own wrong and claim that the sale 
is void ab initio in terms of Sections 47 and 48 of the Act.
16.	 It was submitted that the plaintiff had not placed on record any 
evidence to show that the market value of the suit land was higher 
than Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand) in the year 1971. Therefore, 
the contention of the plaintiff that the suit land was sold for inadequate 
consideration is unacceptable. Further, the defendants proved the 
execution of the Sale Deed dated 15.07.1972 by defendant no.1 in 
favour of defendant no.2 after receipt of consideration of Rs.30,000/- 
(Rupees Thirty Thousand). Moreover, the Sale Deed dated 15.07.1972 
is a registered document and the endorsement of the Sub-Registrar 
shows his presence and that consideration of Rs.30,000/- (Rupees 
Thirty Thousand) was duly received. Hence, validity of the Sale Deed 
dated 15.07.1972 has been proved.
17.	 It was submitted that there are concurrent findings in favour of 
the defendants and there is no perversity in the Impugned Order 
warranting interference by this Court. On these grounds, learned 
counsel prayed for dismissal of the appeal.
316
Supreme Court Reports
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
18.	 Having heard learned counsel for the parties and going through the 
record, including written submissions as filed by the parties concerned, 
we find that there are multiple factors requiring consideration. The 
main issue is as to whether the conveyance of the suit land by 
the original plaintiff dated 02.11.1971 in favour of defendant no.1 
could have been done and, the same having been done, could be 
sustained in law.
19.	 On the aforesaid point, there is no dispute with regard to the 
application of Section 48 of the Act which provides that when on 
any immovable property a charge has been created in favour of any 
society by any member by way of a declaration in pursuance of a 
loan, then there is an embargo on alienating such property during 
the subsistence of the charge. In this regard, sub-sections (c), (d) 
and (e) of Section 48 of the Act are relevant. The concerned Section 
is extracted hereunder: 
‘48. Charge on immovable property of members, 
borrowing from certain societies.—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the 
time being in force—
(a) any person who makes an application to a society of 
which he is a member, for a loan shall, if he owns any land 
or has interest in any land as a tenant, make a declaration 
in the form prescribed. Such declaration shall state that the 
applicant thereby, creates, charge on such land or interest 
specified in the declaration for the payment of the amount 
of the loan which the society may make to the member in 
pursuance of the application and for all future advances 
(if any), required by him which the society may make to 
him as such member, subject to such maximum as may 
be determined by the society, together with interest on 
such amount of the loan and advances; 
(b) any person who has taken a loan from a society of 
which he is a member, before the date of the coming into 
force of this Act, and who owns any land or has interest 
in land as a tenant, and who has not already made such 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
317
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased Through LRs. v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors.
a declaration before the aforesaid date shall, as soon as 
possible thereafter, make a declaration in the form and 
to the effect referred to in clause (a); and no such person 
shall, unless and until he has made such declaration, be 
entitled to exercise any right, as a member of the society; 
(c) a declaration made under clause (a) or (b) may be 
varied at any time by a member, with the consent of the 
society in favor of which such charge is created; 
(d) no member shall alienate the whole or any part of the 
land or interest therein, specified in the declaration made 
under clause (a) or (b) until the whole amount borrowed by 
the member together with interest thereon, is repaid in full: 
Provided that, it shall be lawful to a member to execute a 
mortgage / bond in respect of such land or any part thereof 
in favour of an Agriculture and Rural Development Bank or 
of the State Government under the Bombay Canal Rules 
made under the Bombay Irrigation Act, 1879 or under any 
corresponding law for the time being in force for the supply 
of water from a canal to such land, or to any part thereof: 
Provided further that, if a part of the amount borrowed by a 
member is paid the society with the approval of the Central 
Bank to which it may be indebted may, on an application 
from the member, release from the charge created under 
the declaration made under clause (a) or (b), such part 
of the movable or immovable property specified in the 
said declaration, as it may deem proper, with due regard 
to the security of the balance of the amount remaining 
outstanding from the member; 
(e) any alienation made in contravention of the provisions 
of clause (d) shall be void; 
(f) subject to all claims of the Government in respect of 
land revenue or any money recoverable as land revenue, 
and all claims of the Agriculture and Rural Development 
Bank in respect of its dues, in either case whether prior 
in time or subsequent, and to the charge (if any) created 
under an award made under the Bombay Agricultural 
Debtors Relief Act, 1947 or any corresponding law for the 
318
Supreme Court Reports
time being in force in any part of the State, there shall 
be a first charge in favour of the society on the land or 
interest specified in the declaration made under clause 
(a) or (b), for and to the extent of the dues owing by the 
member on account of the loan;
(g) and in particular, notwithstanding anything contained 
in Chapter X of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 
1966, the Record of Rights maintained there under shall 
also include the particulars of every charge on land or 
interest created under a declaration under clause (a) or 
(b), and also the particulars of extinction of such charge. 
Explanation - For the purposes of this section the 
expression “society” means; (i) any resource society, the 
majority of the members of which are agriculturists and the 
primary object of which is to obtain credit for its members, 
or (ii) Any society, or any society of the class of societies, 
specified in this behalf by him State Government, by a 
general or special order.’
20.	 From a reading of the aforesaid provision, there is no ambiguity with 
regard to the import of the Section. Alienation of any such property 
on which a charge is created in favour of the concerned cooperative 
society by way of declaration is totally beyond the capacity of the 
owner/member who has declared it as a charged property, until the 
amount, for which the charge was created along with the interest, 
is repaid in full. However, even if a part of the amount due is paid 
then a society may, on an application moved by the member, release 
from charge such part of the property, as it may deem proper having 
regard to the outstanding amount.
21.	 In the present case, there is no denial to the fact that the charge on 
the suit land as declared by the plaintiff was prior to the date of him 
executing the Sale Deed dated 02.11.1971 in favour of defendant 
no.1. It is also not in dispute that neither the amount for which the 
charge was created was repaid to the Society either in full or in part 
nor any such application for part-release was either filed before or 
accepted by the Society prior to the said sale. Thus, at first glance, 
it appears to be an open-and-shut case that the said Sale Deed 
dated 02.11.1971 was void as per Section 48(e) of the Act. Further, 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
319
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased Through LRs. v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors.
the subsequent Sale Deed dated 15.07.1972 by respondent no.1/
original defendant no.1 in favour of defendant no.2 on this analogy 
would also have to be held to be void. However, we hasten to add 
that a deeper probe is required as to what extent the theory of the 
sale being void ab initio had to be applied has not been spelt out by 
the statute and, thus is required to be gone into depending upon the 
specific and relevant facts and circumstances of each case as also 
the ancillary background. Therefore, for the time being, the Court 
would move to the other issue and thereafter take a final view having 
regard to the overall picture which emerges, for the final disposal 
of the instant case.
22.	 Coming to the other issue which is as to whether the subsequent 
release of the charge created on the suit land by the Society upon 
receiving the entire dues having been paid by the plaintiff, would 
give retrospectivity to the said release so as to validate and ratify 
the Sale Deeds dated 02.11.1971 and 15.07.1972? Under Section 
48(d) of the Act, a society has the power to release from charge any 
part of the land specified in the declaration. Further, Section 48(c) 
of the Act relates only to variation of the declaration, but by obvious 
and necessary implication, it would include conclusion/release of 
the charge itself, in case the entire dues of a society are satisfied 
by the member who made the declaration. In the present case, the 
Society had itself resolved to release the charge on the suit land on 
27.08.1973. For all practical purposes, the interest of the Society 
has not suffered.
23.	 The emphasis of the plaintiff before this Court is that the Trial Court 
as well as the learned Single Judge had, in the first round of litigation, 
held in his favour and both the Sale Deeds dated 02.11.1971 and 
15.07.1972 were declared void and the suit seeking reconveyance 
was decreed. This raises another question which needs to be 
answered i.e., against whom or between whom, if at all, any alienation 
under Section 48(e) of the Act is applicable for the said acts resulting 
in the same being void?
24.	 In this regard, the conduct of the member/person who has under 
a declaration created a charge upon property in lieu of any loan 
obtained from a society would be important. Section 48(e) of the 
Act declares void any transaction by a member-loanee against the 
society, where he/she alienates such immovable property on which 
320
Supreme Court Reports
a charge is created under declaration. Thus, the primal purpose is 
to safeguard the interest of the society which advanced the loan. As 
a corollary, the right to sue or get a declaration qua any alienation 
made by a loanee rests and is available only to the society in favour 
of whom the property under a declaration was charged. It would, 
therefore, not be within the domain of the member-loanee who 
himself commits a breach to take a stand that the act done by him 
should be declared void, without the society coming forward before 
an appropriate forum to set aside such alienation. The law cannot, 
and does not, reward a person for his/her own wrongs. In Sindav 
Hari Ranchhod v Jadev Lalji Jaymal, (1997) 7 SCC 95, Section 
49 of the Gujarat Cooperative Societies Act, 1961, a provision in 
pari materia to Section 48 of the Act, was involved, and the Court 
observed:
‘8. In our view, this submission on behalf of the learned 
counsel for the respondents cannot be sustained. It is 
true that no relief was claimed by the plaintiffs against 
the Society but the grievance made by the plaintiffs in 
substance was of course on behalf of the Society and 
whether such Society was covered by Section 49 or not 
and whether such Society had waived its statutory right 
or not in favour of Original Defendant 1 were all questions 
which could have been thrashed out only in the presence 
of the Society which conspicuously was not joined as at 
least a proper party. It is also pertinent to note that the 
Society has not challenged these sale deeds executed by 
Defendant 1 at any time. The plaintiffs also failed to lead 
evidence for showing how Section 49(1) got attracted on 
the facts of the present case, despite having full opportunity 
before the trial court to prove their case on this issue. They 
could not be given a second innings just for the asking as 
is done in the impugned order. Consequently the plaintiffs 
could not legitimately and effectively challenge the sale 
transactions entered into by their father in favour of the 
alienees namely Defendants 15 and 10 on the ground of 
violation of Section 49(1) of the Act. In our view on the 
facts of the present case, therefore, there was no occasion 
for the High Court for ordering any remand as on the 
main issue the plaintiffs had failed, hence the suit ought 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
321
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased Through LRs. v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors.
to have been dismissed against all the defendants instead 
of only against some of them as ruled by the High Court. 
Consequently, this appeal is required to be allowed and 
the plaintiffs’ suit against appellant — Defendant 15 also 
is liable to be dismissed as on merits the plaintiffs had 
failed to effectively challenge the sale transactions entered 
into by their father in favour of Defendant 15.’
(emphasis supplied)
25.	 In the present case, it is also not in dispute that the Society, in whose 
favour the charge was created on the land in question, never moved 
before any forum for enforcing its charge over the suit land or raised 
any grievance with regard to either of the Sale Deeds. Thus, the 
situation which emerges is that Section 48(e) of the Act which says 
that any alienation made in contravention of the provisions of clause 
(d) shall be void has to be read as directory to the extent that the 
same can be acted upon only at the instance of the party aggrieved 
(viz. the society concerned) upon whom the right has been created 
under the statute. In other words, with regard to a transaction, unless 
the society comes forward to seek its nullification/setting aside, the 
same would at best be a voidable action and not void ab initio. The 
distinction between ‘void’ and ‘voidable’ was considered by the Court 
in Dhurandhar Prasad Singh v Jai Prakash University, (2001) 6 
SCC 534:
‘16. The expressions “void and voidable” have been the 
subject-matter of consideration before English courts times 
without number. In the case of Durayappah v. Fernando 
[(1967) 2 All ER 152: (1967) 2 AC 337: (1967) 3 WLR 289 
(PC)] the dissolution of the Municipal Council by the Minister 
was challenged. Question had arisen before the Privy 
Council as to whether a third party could challenge such 
a decision. It was held that if the decision was a complete 
nullity, it could be challenged by anyone, anywhere. The 
court observed at p. 158 E-F thus:
“The answer must depend essentially on 
whether the order of the Minister was a complete 
nullity or whether it was an order voidable only 
at the election of the Council. If the former, it 
322
Supreme Court Reports
must follow that the Council is still in office and 
that, if any councillor, ratepayer or other person 
having a legitimate interest in the conduct of the 
Council likes to take the point, they are entitled 
to ask the court to declare that the Council is 
still the duly elected Council with all the powers 
and duties conferred on it by the Municipal 
Ordinance.”
17. In the case of McC (A minor), In re [(1985) 1 AC 528 : 
(1984) 3 All ER 908: (1984) 3 WLR 1227 (HL)] the House of 
Lords followed the dictum of Lord Coke in Marshalsea case 
[(1612) 10 Co Rep 68 b: 77 ER 1027] quoting a passage 
from the said judgment which was rendered in 1613 where 
it was laid down that where the whole proceeding is coram 
non judice which means void ab initio, the action will lie 
without any regard to the precept or process. The Court 
laid down at AC p. 536 thus: (All ER pp. 912h-i, 913a-b)
“Consider two extremes of a very wide spectrum. 
Jurisdiction meant one thing to Lord Coke in 
1613 when he said in Marshalsea case [(1612) 
10 Co Rep 68 b: 77 ER 1027] Co Rep, at p. 76a:
‘… when a court has jurisdiction of the 
cause, and proceeds inverso ordine 
or erroneously, there the party who 
sues, or the officer or Minister of the 
court who executes the precept or 
process of the court, no action lies 
against them. But when the court has 
not jurisdiction of the cause, there 
the whole proceeding is coram non 
judice, and actions will lie against 
them without any regard of the 
precept or process….’
The Court of the Marshalsea in that case acted 
without jurisdiction because, its jurisdiction being 
limited to members of the King’s household, 
it entertained a suit between two citizens 
neither of whom was a member of the King’s 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
323
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased Through LRs. v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors.
household. Arising out of those proceedings a 
party arrested ‘by process of the Marshalsea’ 
could maintain an action for false imprisonment 
against, inter alios, ‘the Marshal who directed 
the execution of the process’. This is but an 
early and perhaps the most-quoted example of 
the application of a principle illustrated by many 
later cases where the question whether a court 
or other tribunal of limited jurisdiction has acted 
without jurisdiction (coram non judice) can be 
determined by considering whether at the outset 
of the proceedings that court had jurisdiction 
to entertain the proceedings at all. So much is 
implicit in the Lord Coke’s phrase ‘jurisdiction 
of the cause’.”
18. In another decision, in the case of Director of Public 
Prosecutions v. Head [1959 AC 83: (1958) 1 All ER 
679: (1958) 2 WLR 617 (HL)] the House of Lords was 
considering the validity of an order passed by the Secretary 
of State in appeal preferred against judgment of acquittal 
passed in a criminal case. The Court of Criminal Appeal 
quashed the conviction on the ground that the aforesaid 
order of the Secretary was null and void and while upholding 
the decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal, the House 
of Lords observed at AC p. 111 thus: (All ER p. 692g-i)
“This contention seems to me to raise the whole 
question of void or voidable; for if the original 
order was void, it would in law be a nullity. There 
would be no need for an order to quash it. It 
would be automatically null and void without 
more ado. The continuation orders would be 
nullities too, because you cannot continue a 
nullity. The licence to Miss Henderson would 
be a nullity. So would all the dealings with her 
property under Section 64 of the Act of 1913 
[ Mental Deficiency Act]. None of the orders 
would be admissible in evidence. The Secretary 
of State would, I fancy, be liable in damages 
for all of the ten years during which she was 
324
Supreme Court Reports
unlawfully detained, since it could all be said to 
flow from his negligent act; see Section 16 of 
the Mental Treatment Act, 1930.
But if the original order was only voidable, then 
it would not be automatically void. Something 
would have to be done to avoid it. There would 
have to be an application to the High Court for 
certiorari to quash it.”
19. This question was examined by the Court of Appeal 
in the case of R. v. Paddington Valuation Officer, ex p 
Peachey Property Corpn. Ltd. [(1965) 2 All ER 836: (1966) 
1 QB 380: (1965) 3 WLR 426 (CA)] where the valuation 
list was challenged on the ground that the same was void 
altogether. On these facts, Lord Denning, M.R. laid down 
the law, observing at p. 841 thus:
“It is necessary to distinguish between two kinds 
of invalidity. The one kind is where the invalidity 
is so grave that the list is a nullity altogether. 
In which case there is no need for an order 
to quash it. It is automatically null and void 
without more ado. The other kind is when the 
invalidity does not make the list void altogether, 
but only voidable. In that case it stands unless 
and until it is set aside. In the present case the 
valuation list is not, and never has been, a nullity. 
At most the first respondent — acting within 
his jurisdiction  — exercised that jurisdiction 
erroneously. That makes the list voidable and 
not void. It remains good until it is set aside.”
20. de Smith, Woolf and Jowell in their treatise Judicial 
Review of Administrative Action, 5th Edn., para 5-044, have 
summarised the concept of void and voidable as follows:
“Behind the simple dichotomy of void and 
voidable acts (invalid and valid until declared 
to be invalid) lurk terminological and conceptual 
problems of excruciating complexity. The 
problems arose from the premise that if an act, 
order or decision is ultra vires in the sense of 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
325
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased Through LRs. v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors.
outside jurisdiction, it was said to be invalid, or 
null and void. If it is intra vires it was, of course, 
valid. If it is flawed by an error perpetrated within 
the area of authority or jurisdiction, it was usually 
said to be voidable; that is, valid till set aside on 
appeal or in the past quashed by certiorari for 
error of law on the face of the record.”
21. Clive Lewis in his work Judicial Remedies in Public 
Law at p. 131 has explained the expressions “void and 
voidable” as follows:
“A challenge to the validity of an act may be by 
direct action or by way of collateral or indirect 
challenge. A direct action is one where the 
principal purpose of the action is to establish 
the invalidity. This will usually be by way of 
an application for judicial review or by use of 
any statutory mechanism for appeal or review. 
Collateral challenges arise when the invalidity is 
raised in the course of some other proceedings, 
the purpose of which is not to establish invalidity 
but where questions of validity become relevant.”
22. Thus the expressions “void and voidable” have been 
the subject-matter of consideration on innumerable 
occasions by courts. The expression “void” has several 
facets. One type of void acts, transactions, decrees are 
those which are wholly without jurisdiction, ab initio void 
and for avoiding the same no declaration is necessary, 
law does not take any notice of the same and it can be 
disregarded in collateral proceeding or otherwise. The 
other type of void act, e.g., may be transaction against a 
minor without being represented by a next friend. Such a 
transaction is a good transaction against the whole world. 
So far as the minor is concerned, if he decides to avoid 
the same and succeeds in avoiding it by taking recourse 
to appropriate proceeding the transaction becomes void 
from the very beginning. Another type of void act may 
be which is not a nullity but for avoiding the same a 
declaration has to be made. Voidable act is that which 
is a good act unless avoided, e.g., if a suit is filed for a 
326
Supreme Court Reports
declaration that a document is fraudulent and/or forged and 
fabricated, it is voidable as the apparent state of affairs is 
the real state of affairs and a party who alleges otherwise 
is obliged to prove it. If it is proved that the document is 
forged and fabricated and a declaration to that effect is 
given, a transaction becomes void from the very beginning. 
There may be a voidable transaction which is required to 
be set aside and the same is avoided from the day it is 
so set aside and not any day prior to it. In cases where 
legal effect of a document cannot be taken away without 
setting aside the same, it cannot be treated to be void but 
would be obviously voidable.’
(emphasis supplied)
26.	 Another aspect of importance is the fact that ultimately, the dues of 
the Society have been cleared, may be by the plaintiff himself, but 
the result is that the same has also been followed up by acceptance 
and release by the Society i.e., the suit land stood released from 
charge on and with effect from 27.08.1973.
27.	 Another factual aspect raised by the appellants is that the suit 
land is highly undervalued as the consideration is only Rs.5,000/- 
(Rupees Five Thousand) though the same ought to have been 
Rs.25,000/- (Rupees Twenty-Five Thousand). This contention 
cannot be given much importance considering the relationship 
between the parties i.e., the defendant no.1 being the son-in-law 
and nephew of the plaintiff. Further, no material to buttress/support 
the claim of the valuation being Rs.25,000/- (Rupees Twenty-Five 
Thousand) was ever produced before any of the Courts below. 
Thus, a bald statement on a purely factual aspect has rightly not 
been accepted by the Courts. We too do not propose to chart a 
different course on this.
28.	 Before, however, forming a final view, this Court is also required 
to consider the plea of the appellants that on 02.11.1971, after 
execution of the Sale Deed by the plaintiff in favour of respondent 
no.1/ defendant no.1, immediately a reconveyance deed under 
the name and style of ‘Ram Ram Patra’ was also executed, which 
stipulated that upon Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand) being repaid 
by the plaintiff to the respondent no.1/ defendant no.1, he would 
re-convey the land to the plaintiff. This document would not be of 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
327
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased Through LRs. v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors.
any help to the appellants mainly because cognizance of the same 
cannot be taken in view of the document not being executed either 
on stamp paper or registered and, additionally, being in the writing 
of a different scribe vis-a-vis the registered Sale Deed of even date. 
Moreover, the plaintiff while executing the registered Sale Deed on 
02.11.1971 in favour of defendant no.1 has clearly stated that the 
suit land was free of any encumbrance(s), which, in our opinion, 
negates the argument urged that the sale was a conditional sale 
and not a full-fledged sale.
29.	 Though neither discussed in any of the Orders nor argued by any 
party, a serious doubt arises in the mind of the Court inasmuch as 
it cannot be believed that a valid reconveyance deed would not 
specify any time-period and also not provide for any escalation in 
the amount to be returned in lieu of reconveyance i.e., to say that 
for an indefinite period the land would remain with defendant no.1, 
but whenever the plaintiff wants, he can ask for its reconveyance by 
paying merely Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand). Besides being 
iniquitous, this also demonstrates that such term could not have been 
incorporated, if at all there was a genuine reconveyance deed. Had 
it really been agreed between the parties that the suit land was to 
be reconveyed upon the money being returned, the money to be 
returned would be commensurate with escalation for the period for 
which it was not returned by providing for some increase, either 
quantified or by prescribing a rate of interest and most importantly 
an outward time-limit. These are conspicuous by their absence in 
the Reconveyance Deed.
30.	 It is also noteworthy that the plaintiff has nowhere stated that he 
ever approached defendant no.1 for re-conveying the suit land. The 
only stand taken was that he was ready to return Rs.5,000/- (Rupees 
Five Thousand) and that the Court may pass a decree directing 
reconveyance for the sum of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand). 
This itself dilutes the claim inasmuch as the cause of action would 
arise when the plaintiff asserted that he was ready, willing and 
offered to pay the amount to defendant no.1, who refused to accept 
such payment of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand). Absent such 
averment, no relief can enure to the plaintiff.
31.	 Apropos the rights of the parties inter-se, the Court would only observe 
that defendant no.2 was a bonafide purchaser from respondent 
328
Supreme Court Reports
no.1/defendant no.1, on the date the Sale Deed was executed on 
15.07.1972, for the reason that such transaction was made on the 
basis of the title which was apparent from the Sale Deed dated 
02.11.1971 in favour of respondent no.1/defendant no.1. This would 
not have given any occasion to defendant no.2 to be cautious or 
under any impression, much less knowledge, that the property bought 
by him was encumbered on the date of purchase.
32.	 Undoubtedly, the present case comes under a unique category 
where a person on the one hand comes before a Court seeking 
that his own actions be nullified on the ground that it was void and 
on the other hand wants relief in his favour, which is consequential 
to and traceable to his own wrong. It would not be proper for a 
Court of law to assist or aid such person who states that the wrong 
he committed be set aside and a relief be granted de hors the 
wrong committed, after condoning the same. In the present case, 
the plaintiff cannot be allowed to benefit from his own wrong and 
the Court will not be a party to a perpetuation of illegality. In Ram 
Pyare v Ram Narain, (1985) 2 SCC 162, a 3-Judge Bench of this 
Court, in the circumstances therein, did not void a transaction 
even though the transaction was void being prohibited by law. 
The principle that no party can take advantage of his/her own 
wrong i.e. ex injuria sua nemo habere debet is squarely attracted. 
In Kusheshwar Prasad Singh v State of Bihar, (2007) 11 SCC 
447, it was held:
‘13. The appellant is also right in contending before this 
Court that the power under Section 32-B of the Act to 
initiate fresh proceedings could not have been exercised. 
Admittedly, Section 32-B came on the statute book by Bihar 
Act 55 of 1982. The case of the appellant was over much 
prior to the amendment of the Act and insertion of Section 
32-B. The appellant, therefore, is right in contending that 
the authorities cannot be allowed to take undue advantage 
of their own default in failure to act in accordance with law 
and initiate fresh proceedings.
14. In this connection, our attention has been invited by 
the learned counsel for the appellant to a decision of this 
Court in Mrutunjay Pani v. Narmada Bala Sasmal [AIR 
1961 SC 1353] wherein it was held by this Court that 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
329
Machhindranath S/o Kundlik Tarade Deceased Through LRs. v. 
Ramchandra Gangadhar Dhamne & Ors.
where an obligation is cast on a party and he commits a 
breach of such obligation, he cannot be permitted to take 
advantage of such situation. This is based on the Latin 
maxim commodum ex injuria sua nemo habere debet (no 
party can take undue advantage of his own wrong).
15. In Union of India v. Major General Madan Lal Yadav 
[(1996) 4 SCC 127: 1996 SCC (Cri) 592] the accused 
army personnel himself was responsible for delay as he 
escaped from detention. Then he raised an objection 
against initiation of proceedings on the ground that such 
proceedings ought to have been initiated within six months 
under the Army Act, 1950. Referring to the above maxim, 
this Court held that the accused could not take undue 
advantage of his own wrong. Considering the relevant 
provisions of the Act, the Court held that presence of the 
accused was an essential condition for the commencement 
of trial and when the accused did not make himself 
available, he could not be allowed to raise a contention 
that proceedings were time-barred. This Court (at SCC 
p. 142, para 28) referred to Broom’s Legal Maxims (10th 
Edn.), p. 191 wherein it was stated:
“It is a maxim of law, recognised and established, 
that no man shall take advantage of his own 
wrong; and this maxim, which is based on 
elementary principles, is fully recognised in 
courts of law and of equity, and, indeed, admits of 
illustration from every branch of legal procedure.”
16. It is settled principle of law that a man cannot be 
permitted to take undue and unfair advantage of his own 
wrong to gain favourable interpretation of law. It is sound 
principle that he who prevents a thing from being done 
shall not avail himself of the non-performance he has 
occasioned. To put it differently, “a wrongdoer ought not 
to be permitted to make a profit out of his own wrong”.’
(emphasis supplied)
33.	 On an overall circumspection, the learned Single Judge and the 
Division Bench have not committed any error.
330
Supreme Court Reports
34.	 In the light of the discussions made and reasons recorded hereinabove, 
we do not find any merit in the present appeal. Accordingly, the appeal 
stands dismissed.
35.	 No order as to costs. I.A. No.42744/2020 is closed.
36.	 Registry is directed to prepare Decree Sheet accordingly. 
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey