[2025] 5 S.C.R. 47 : 2025 INSC 462
K. Gopi 
v. 
The Sub-Registrar & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 3954 of 2025)
07 April 2025
[Abhay S. Oka* and Ujjal Bhuyan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to the correctness of order by the Division Bench 
of the High Court with regard to upholding the order of the  
sub-registrar, refusing registration of a sale deed.
Headnotes†
Registration Act, 1908 – s.69 – Registration (Tamil Nadu 
Amendment) Act, 2008 – ss.22-A, 22-B – Registration 
Rules – r.55A – Vires of r. 55A – Refusal of the Sub-registrar 
to register the sale deed on the ground that the title of the 
vendor and the appellant not established – Correctness – 
Sub-Registrar refused to register sale deed executed in 
favour of the appellant – On direction by the Sub-Registrar 
to reconsider, the Sub-Registrar again refused registration – 
Writ petition thereagainst rejected – Writ appeal challenging 
the rejection also dismissed – Interference: 
Held: On plain reading of ss.22-A and 22-B, on the ground of 
failure to produce documents of title of the vendor, registration 
could not have been refused – No provision under the 1908 
Act confers power on any authority to refuse registration of a 
transfer document on the ground that the documents regarding 
the title of the vendor are not produced, or if his title is not 
established – r.55A provides that unless documents are produced 
to prove that the executant has a right in respect of the property 
subject matter of the instrument, the registration of the same 
shall be refused – Under the scheme of the 1908 Act, it is not 
the function of the Sub-Registrar or Registering Authority to 
ascertain whether the vendor has title to the property which he 
is seeking to transfer – Once the registering authority is satisfied 
that the parties to the document are present before him and the 
parties admit execution thereof before him, subject to making 
procedural compliances, the document must be registered – 
* Author
48
Supreme Court Reports
Rule making power u/s.69 cannot be exercised to make a Rule 
that is inconsistent with the provisions of the 1908 Act – r.55A(i) 
is inconsistent with the provisions of the 1908 Act, thus, r.55 
declared ultra vires the 1908 Act – Impugned judgment quashed 
and set aside. [Paras 9,11-17]
List of Acts
Registration Act, 1908; Registration (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 
2008; Tamil Nadu Registration Rules.
List of Keywords
Sale deed; Registration of sale deed; Title of the vendor; Refusal 
to register sale deed; Power to make rules under Registration 
Act; Non-traceable certificate; Adjudicatory power of registering 
officer. 
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3954 of  
2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.03.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras at Chennai in WA No. 907 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Mohd Parvez Dabas, Uzmi Jameel Husain, Ms. Qurratulain,  
Ms. Shagun Mishra.
Advs. for the Respondents:
P.S. Raman, Sr. Adv./AG, Sabarish Subramanian, B Vijay, Vishnu 
Unnikrishnan.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Abhay S. Oka, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.	
This appeal takes an exception to the impugned judgment dated 
20th March, 2024, passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
49
K. Gopi v. The Sub-Registrar & Ors.
Judicature at Madras. On 02nd September, 2022, a sale deed was 
executed by one Jayaraman Mudaliyar in favour of the appellant 
in respect of the property mentioned therein. The Sub-Registrar 
refused to register the sale deed. The appellant filed a writ petition 
to challenge the refusal. However, the writ petition was dismissed. 
Thereafter, the appellant preferred an appeal to the District Registrar 
against the Sub-Registrar’s order refusing to register the sale deed. 
The appeal was allowed by the order dated 04th September, 2023, 
and the District Registrar directed the Sub-Registrar to reconsider his 
decision. By a letter dated 05th September, 2023, the Sub-Registrar 
directed the appellant to resubmit the document along with proof of 
the vendor’s title to transfer the property. On 03rd October, 2023, the 
appellant again submitted the sale deed for registration. However, 
by the order passed on the same day, registration was refused. A 
writ petition was filed against the order of refusal. The writ petition 
was rejected. A writ appeal was preferred against the rejection of the 
writ petition by the learned Single Judge, which has been dismissed 
by the impugned order. 
2.	
The writ appeal was dismissed by the impugned judgment by holding 
that under Rule 55A of the Registration Rules under the Registration 
Act, 1908 (for short ‘the 1908 Act) framed by the Government of 
Tamil Nadu, the Sub-Registrar was entitled to refuse the registration 
of the sale deed on the ground that the appellant’s vendor has not 
established his title and ownership. The relevant part of the impugned 
judgment reads thus:
“2. The petitioner presented Sale Deed for registration 
under the Registration Act, 1908. The Sub-Registrar 
refused to register the document on the basis that the 
petitioner had not established his title and ownership, as 
required under Rule 55-A of the Registration Rules. Even 
on earlier occasion, the Writ Petition filed by the petitioner 
was rejected on the ground that he has to impleaded the 
legal heirs, since the petitioner claims title based on the 
unregistered Will. In the event of any doubt regarding 
title, the registering authority is empowered to return the 
document under the provisions of the Act. In the present 
case, the petitioner was granted liberty to workout his 
remedy in the manner known to law. When doubt arises 
and the legal heirs are not impleaded, the parties are to 
50
Supreme Court Reports
be relegated to approach the Civil Court and in the present 
case, the Writ Court has rightly done so. Thus, we do not 
find any infirmity in respect of the order impugned.”
3.	
By the order dated 14th November, 2024, this Court permitted the 
appellant to amend the present Petition for Special Leave to Appeal to 
incorporate a challenge to the validity of Rule 55A(i) of the Registration 
Rules. Accordingly, the SLP was amended. The first respondent, the 
Sub-Registrar, has filed a counter-affidavit on behalf of the State 
Government in response to the amended petition. 
SUBMISSIONS
4.	
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the 
Sub-Registrar, who is empowered to register a document under 
the 1908 Act, is not empowered to go into the question of the title 
of the person executing the document for transferring the property. 
Learned counsel submitted that the Registration Rules have been 
framed in accordance with the powers under Section 69 of the 1908 
Act. Firstly, Section 69 does not empower the Inspector General to 
frame Rules providing power to refuse registration of a sale deed 
or transfer deed in the event the vendor has failed to prove his title. 
Moreover, the Rules can be framed which are consistent with the 
Act. In the 1908 Act, there is no provision to refuse registration on 
the ground that the vendor has not proved his title. Therefore, Rule 
55(A)(i) is ultra vires the provision of the 1908 Act and therefore, 
Rule 55(A)(i) is invalid.
5.	
The Learned Advocate General for the State of Tamil Nadu appeared 
for the respondents and submitted that, without going into the legal 
controversy, the state is prepared to take steps for the registration of 
the sale deed. He submitted that the validity challenge in respect of 
Rule 55A(i) is pending before the High Court, and therefore, in this 
SLP, for the first time, a validity challenge cannot be entertained. He 
submitted that in this case, the issue of validity may be academic. 
He submitted that Rule 55A has been framed to give effect to the 
object of preventing registration of bogus transactions. He urged 
that the Rule has been framed well within the Rule-making power 
conferred under Section 69 of the 1908 Act. He urged that Rule 
55A has been enacted to give effect to Sections 22-A and 22-B of 
the 1908 Act incorporated by the State amendment. Therefore, no 
interference is called for. 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
51
K. Gopi v. The Sub-Registrar & Ors.
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
6.	
Rule 55A of the Registration Rules reads thus:
“55A (i) The registering officer before whom a document 
relating to immovable property is presented for 
registration, shall not register the same, unless the 
presentant produces the previous original deed by 
which the executant acquired right over the subject 
property and an Encumbrance Certificate pertaining 
to the property obtained within ten days from the date 
of presentation;
Provided that in case an encumbrance as to mortgage, 
orders on attachment of property, sale agreement or lease 
agreement exists over the property, the registering officer 
shall not register such document if the time limit for filing of 
suit is not lapsed or No Objection Certificate is not granted 
by the appropriate authority or raising of the attachment 
is not done, as the case may be;
Provided further that in case the previous original deed is 
not available as the property being an ancestral one, the 
registering officer shall not register such document, unless 
the presentant produce any revenue record evidencing 
the executant’s right over the subject property such as 
patta copy issued by Revenue Department or tax receipt;
Provided also that if the previous original deed is lost, the 
registering officer shall register such document only on 
production of non-traceable Certificate issued by the Police 
department alongwith the advertisement published in the 
local Newspaper as to the notice of loss of the previous 
original deed;
Provided also that production of the previous original 
deed shall not be necessary where the Government or a 
Statutory body is the executant of the document or for such 
class of documents as may be notified by the Inspector 
General of Registration, from time to time
(ii) The registering officer, on being satisfied that the 
description of the property contained in the document 
presented for registration conforms with the description of 
52
Supreme Court Reports
the property found in the previous original deed produced 
by the presentant as provided under this rule, he shall 
inscribe the word ‘verified’ on a conspicuous portion of the 
first page of such title deed and affix his signature with 
date and thereafter cause scanning of page containing 
such inscription as a reference document
(iii) In case where revenue records are produced under this 
rule, the same shall be scanned as the main document and 
where Non-Traceable Certificate and the advertisement 
published in the local Newspaper are submitted by the 
presentant, the same shall be scanned as reference 
documents;
Provided that such verification and scanning of the previous 
original deed or record in the manner provided under this 
rule, shall not be construed to be an act of ascertaining 
the validity of the document presented for registration and 
also the same shall not absolve or deprive any person 
from the provisions contained in Parts XIV and XV of the 
Registration Act, 1908 (Central Act XVI of 1908)”
(emphasis added)
7.	
In substance, Clause (i) of Rule 55A mandates that when a document 
relating to an immovable property is presented for registration before 
a registering officer, the same shall not be registered unless the 
presentant produces the previous original deed by which the executant 
acquired the right over the subject property and an encumbrance 
certificate obtained within ten days of the date of presentation. It 
is also provided that, in the event of an encumbrance such as a 
mortgage, attachment, sale agreement, or lease agreement, the 
registering officer shall not register such a document if the time 
limit for filing a suit for specific performance has not lapsed or the 
appropriate authority has not granted a No Objection Certificate. 
8.	
At this stage, we must also refer to Sections 22-A and 22-B 
incorporated by the State of Tamil Nadu in the 1908 Act. Sections 
22-A and 22-B of the Registration (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 
2008 read thus:
“22-A Refusal to register certain documents - 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
53
K. Gopi v. The Sub-Registrar & Ors.
registering officer shall refuse to register any of the following 
documents namely:-
(1) instrument relating to the transfer of immovable 
properties by way of sale, gift, mortgage, exchange or 
lease:
(i)	
belonging to the State Government or the local 
authority or Chennai Metropolitan Development  
Authority established under Section 9-A of the Tamil 
Nadu Town and Country Planning Act, 1971;
(ii)	
belonging to, or given or endowed for the purpose 
of any religious institution to which the Tamil Nadu 
Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959 is 
applicable;
(iii)	 donated for Bhoodan Yagna and vested the Tamil 
Nadu State Bhoodan Yagna Board established 
under Section 3 of the Tamil Nadu Bhoodan Yagna 
Act, 1958; or
(iv)	 of Wakfs which are under the superintendence of 
the Tamil Nadu Wakf Board established under the 
Wakf Act, 1995;
unless a sanction in this regard issued by the competent 
authority as provided under the relevant Act or in the 
absence of any such authority, an authority so authorised 
by the State Government for this purpose, is produced 
before the registering officer;
(2) instrument relating to the transfer of ownership of 
lands converted as house sites without the permission 
for development of such land from planning authority 
concerned;
provided that the house sites without such permission may 
be registered if it is shown that the same house site has 
been previously registered as house site”
22-B. Refusal to register forged documents and other 
documents prohibited by law- Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, the registering officer shall refuse to 
register the following documents, namely:-
54
Supreme Court Reports
(1) forged document;
(2) document relating to transaction, which is prohibited 
by any Central Act or State Act for the time being in force;
(3) document relating to transfer of immovable property 
by way of sale, gift, lease or otherwise, which is attached 
permanently or provisionally by a competent authority 
under any Central Act or State Act for the time being in 
force or any Court or Tribunal;
(4) any other document as the State Government may, 
by notification, specify”
9.	
In the present case, the registration was refused on the ground that 
the title of the vendor and the appellant was not established. On 
plain reading of Sections 22-A and 22-B, on the ground of failure 
to produce documents of title of the vendor, registration could not 
have been refused. 
10.	 Now, we come to the Rule-making power under Section 69 of the 
1908 Act, which reads thus:
“69. Power of Inspector General to superintend 
registration offices and make rules.—(1) The Inspector 
General shall exercise a general superintendence over all 
the registration offices in the territories under the State 
Government and shall have power from time to time 
to make rules consistent with this Act—
(a) providing for the safe custody of books, papers and 
documents;
(aa) providing the manner in which and the safeguards 
subject to which the books may be kept in computer 
floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic form under 
sub-section (1) of Section 16-A;
(b) declaring what languages shall be deemed to be 
commonly used in each district;
(c) declaring what territorial divisions shall be recognized 
under Section 21;
(d) regulating the amount of fines imposed under Sections 
25 and 34, respectively;
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
55
K. Gopi v. The Sub-Registrar & Ors.
(e) regulating the exercise of the discretion reposed in the 
registering officer by Section 63;
(f) regulating the form in which registering officers are to 
make memoranda of documents;
(g) regulating the authentication by Registrars and Sub-
Registrars of the books kept in their respective offices 
under Section 51;
(gg) regulating the manner in which the instruments referred 
to in sub-section (2) of Section 88 may be presented for 
registration;
(h) declaring the particulars to be contained in Indexes 
Nos. I, II, III and IV, respectively;
(i) declaring the holidays that shall be observed in the 
registration offices; and
(j) generally, regulating the proceedings of the Registrars 
and Sub-Registrars.
(2) The rules so made shall be submitted to the State 
Government for approval and, after they have been 
approved, they shall be published in the Official Gazette, 
and on publication shall have effect as if enacted in this 
Act.”
(emphasis added)
11.	 None of Clauses (a) to (j) provides for framing Rules conferring 
power on the registering authority to refuse registration of a document 
of transfer. No provision under the 1908 Act confers power on 
any authority to refuse registration of a transfer document on the 
ground that the documents regarding the title of the vendor are not 
produced, or if his title is not established. Even Sections 22-A and 
22-B, incorporated by way of State amendment, do not have such 
a provision. 
12.	 Section 22-A is restricted to specific cases. Sub-Section (1) thereof 
confers power on the registering officer to refuse registration in respect 
of the properties mentioned in clauses (i) to (iv). Sub-Section (2) of 
Section 22-A enables the registering officer to refuse registration of 
instruments relating to the transfer of ownership of lands converted 
56
Supreme Court Reports
as house sites without the permission for development being granted 
by the planning authority. Section 22-B enables the registering officer 
to refuse registration of a forged document. It also confers power on 
the registering officer to refuse registration of a document in respect 
of a transaction that is prohibited under either the laws of the State 
or the Central Government. If any property has been attached either 
permanently or provisionally by a competent authority under the 
Central Act or State Act, Section 22-B enjoins the registering officer 
to refuse registration of a document making a transfer. Sections 
22-A and 22-B provide for mandatory refusal of registration of the 
documents covered by specific categories mentioned therein
13.	 In contrast, Rule 55A empowers the registering officer to refuse 
registration unless the presentant produces the original deed by 
which the executant acquired rights over the subject property and 
an encumbrance certificate pertaining to the property, obtained 
within ten days from the date of presentation. If the original deed is 
not available due to its antiquity, the registration of the presented 
document will be refused unless the presenter produces a revenue 
record that evidences the executant’s right over the subject property. 
If the original deed is lost, the document cannot be registered unless 
a non-traceable certificate is issued by the police department along 
with an advertisement published in the local newspaper, giving notice 
of the loss of the previous original deed. 
14.	 In short, Rule 55A provides that unless documents are produced 
to prove that the executant has a right in respect of the property 
subject matter of the instrument, the registration of the same shall be 
refused. Thus, if a sale deed is presented for registration, documents 
must be produced to demonstrate that the executant has acquired 
ownership of the property. In a sense, power has been conferred 
on the registering officer to verify the title of the executant. Unless 
documents are produced evidencing title as required by Rule 55A(i), 
registration of the sale deed shall be refused. 
15.	 The registering officer is not concerned with the title held by the 
executant. He has no adjudicatory power to decide whether the 
executant has any title. Even if an executant executes a sale deed 
or a lease in respect of a land in respect of which he has no title, 
the registering officer cannot refuse to register the document if all 
the procedural compliances are made and the necessary stamp duty 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
57
K. Gopi v. The Sub-Registrar & Ors.
as well as registration charges/fee are paid. We may note here that 
under the scheme of the 1908 Act, it is not the function of the Sub-
Registrar or Registering Authority to ascertain whether the vendor 
has title to the property which he is seeking to transfer. Once the 
registering authority is satisfied that the parties to the document are 
present before him and the parties admit execution thereof before 
him, subject to making procedural compliances as narrated above, 
the document must be registered. The execution and registration of 
a document have the effect of transferring only those rights, if any, 
that the executant possesses. If the executant has no right, title, or 
interest in the property, the registered document cannot effect any 
transfer.
16.	 Therefore, assuming that there is a power under Section 69 of the 
1908 Act to frame the Rules, Rule 55A(i) is inconsistent with the 
provisions of the 1908 Act. Due to the inconsistency, Rule 55A(i) 
will have to be declared ultra vires the 1908 Act.  The rule-making 
power under Section 69 cannot be exercised to make a Rule that 
is inconsistent with the provisions of the 1908 Act. Rule 55A(i) is 
accordingly declared as ultra vires the 1908 Act.
17.	 As the writ petition filed by the appellant was dismissed by the High 
Court, relying on Rule 55A(i), and since Rule 55A(i) is held to be 
invalid, the impugned judgments must be quashed and set aside. 
Ordered accordingly.
18.	 We, therefore, permit the appellant to lodge the sale deed for 
registration within a period of one month from today. On procedural 
compliances being made, the concerned registering officer shall 
proceed to register the sale deed. 
19.	 The appeal is accordingly allowed in the above terms. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain