[2025] 5 S.C.R. 425 : 2025 INSC 458
Biswajyoti Chatterjee  
v. 
State of West Bengal & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1842 of 2025)
07 April 2025
[B.V. Nagarathna and Satish Chandra Sharma,* JJ.] 
Issue for Consideration
Whether the allegations against the appellant, as they stand, 
constitute an offence, u/ss.376(2)(f), 417 and 506 IPC; and whether 
the case of the appellant is fit for discharge u/s.227 CrPC, 1973. 
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.376(2)(f), 417 and 506 – Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.227 – The case of respondent 
no.2/complainant was that during the pendency of the 
litigation arising out of a marital discord with her ex-husband, 
she came in contact with the appellant – Appellant, who was 
also separated from his wife, had assured the complainant 
that he will marry her, once she gets divorced – However, 
when the divorce of the complainant was finalized, appellant 
avoided her – FIR was registered – Appellant sought 
discharge by filing application u/s.227 CrPC – The said 
application was dismissed by the District and Session 
Judge – Challenge to the said order was dismissed by the 
High Court – Correctness:
Held: It is the own case of the complainant/respondent No.2 that 
during the relevant time, the appellant had duly informed her that 
he was separated from his wife – The complainant who was well 
aware of the personal as well as the professional background 
of the appellant, who had been receiving financial help from the 
appellant for herself and her son, must have carefully weighed her 
decision before entering into a relationship with the appellant – It 
is from day one that she had knowledge and was conscious of 
the fact, that the appellant was in a subsisting marriage, though 
separated – It is upon having an active understanding of the 
* Author
426
Supreme Court Reports
circumstances, actions and the consequences of the acts, that 
the complainant made a reasoned choice to sustain a relationship 
with the appellant – In considered view of this Court, even if the 
allegations in the FIR and the charge-sheet are taken at their 
face value, it is improbable that the complainant had engaged in 
a physical relationship with the appellant, only on account of an 
assurance of marriage – There are also inconsistencies in the 
statements of the prosecutrix insofar as it is deposed by her in 
the statement u/s.164 CrPC – Considering overall factual matrix 
of the case, it is clear that the physical relationship between the 
complainant and the appellant was consensual, cannot be said 
to be without her consent or against her will – It would be in the 
interest of justice if the proceedings are terminated at this stage 
itself.[Paras 14, 15, 16, 19, 22]
Case Law Cited
Pramod Suryabhan Pawar v. State of Maharashtra [2019] 11 SCR 
423 : [2019] 9 SCC 608; Uday v. State of Karnataka [2003] 2 SCR 
231 : (2003) 4 SCC 46 – relied on.
Dr. Dhruvaram Muralidha Sonar v. State of Maharashtra [2018] 13 
SCR 920 : [2019] 18 SCC 191; Central Bureau of Investigation 
v. Aryan Singh [2023] 2 SCR 819 : [2023] SCC Online SC 379; 
Prashant Bharti v. State of NCT of Delhi [2013] 1 SCR 504 : 2024 
SCC Online SC 3375 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Marital discord; Pending litigation; Divorce; Consent; Will; 
Subsisting marriage; Circumstances; Actions; Consequences of 
the acts; Physical relationship; Assurance of marriage; Consensual 
relationship.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1842 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.02.2024 of the High Court 
at Calcutta in CRR No. 639 of 2024
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
427
Biswajyoti Chatterjee v. State of West Bengal & Anr.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Pijush K. Roy, Sr. Adv., Ms. Kakali Roy, Rajan K. Chourasia,  
Ms. Satyama Dubey, Sharath Nambiar, Vinayak Sharma.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Ms. Astha Sharma, Samrat Goswami, Sunando Raha, Sk Sayan 
Uddin, Kunal Malik, Manish Awasthi.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Satish Chandra Sharma, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
The Appellant has approached this Court being aggrieved by the 
Order dated 23.02.2024 passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Calcutta 
in CRR No. 639/2024 filed under Section 402 r/w 482 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (“CrPC”), whereby the Hon’ble High 
Court refused to discharge the Appellant in FIR No. 13/2015 dt. 
14.12.2015 registered with Mahila Police Station, Haldia, District 
Purba MDP, Sub Div. Haldia under Sections 376/417/506 IPC (“FIR”) 
and dismissed the Revision Petition against Order dt. 04.01.2024 
passed by the Ld. District & Sessions Judge, Purba Mednipur at 
Tamluk in Sessions Case No. 198/2023. 
3.	
The Appellant is a former judicial officer who has superannuated 
from the post of Civil Judge (Senior Division), City Civil Court, 
Calcutta. The FIR was registered at the behest of the Respondent 
no.2/Complainant, who has alleged that it was in 2014, during the 
pendency of the litigation arising out of a marital discord with her 
ex-husband, that she came in contact with the Appellant, then 
posted as ACJM, Haldia, Dist. Purba, Medinipur. It is the case of 
the Complainant that the Appellant, who was also separated from 
his wife, had assured the Complainant/Respondent no.2 that he 
will marry her and will take complete responsibility of her and her 
son from the first marriage, as his own, once she gets divorced. 
The Appellant purportedly kept the Complainant in a rented house 
at Tamluk, and got her son admitted in Tamralipta Public School, at 
428
Supreme Court Reports
his expense. The Appellant also regularly transferred money into the 
bank account of the Complainant for her day-to-day expenses and 
that of her son. It was allegedly on this pretext that the Appellant 
had physical relations with the Complainant on multiple occasions. It 
is alleged that the Appellant also took the Complainant/Respondent 
no. 2 to his residence in Kolkata, and had repeatedly assured her 
that he will marry her. However, when the divorce of the Respondent 
No.2/Complainant was finalized, the Appellant started avoiding her, 
stopped answering her phone calls and told her not to have any 
contact with him whatsoever.
4.	
The Complainant in her statement under section 164 CrPC, reiterated 
the said allegations and further deposed that it was upon the insistence 
of the Appellant that she had handed over the cases against her 
husband to one Advocate Mr. Gopal Chandra Dass, who would not 
charge any fees from her. It was stated that once her divorce was 
finalized, the Appellant had stopped receiving her phone calls and 
had instructed his security guard Anup, to not make calls, otherwise 
he would harm her son. It was stated that the Appellant had exploited 
the Complainant, mentally and physically. 
5.	
During the course of investigation, the Appellant was granted 
Anticipatory Bail by the Hon’ble High Court, Calcutta vide Order dt. 
13.01.2016 in CRM No. 11930/2015. 
6.	
The investigation was transferred to Criminal Investigation Department 
[CID], West Bengal, which culminated into charge-sheet dt. 
30.04.2020 against the Appellant, and Mr. Gopal Chandra Dass. 
The Ld. Magistrate took cognizance of the same, vide Order dt. 
01.05.2020, which was challenged by the Appellant in Revision by 
way of CRR No. 1550/2020. Vide Order dt. 20.11.2020, the High 
Court had directed the Appellant to seek appropriate remedies, 
once the case was committed to the Sessions Court. The Revision 
Petition CRR No. 1550/2020 was ultimately dismissed vide Order 
dt. 21.11.2022 passed by the High Court observing that there is 
substance in the allegations and there exists prima facie material to 
make out a cognizable offence, against the Appellant. 
7.	
The Appellant sought discharge by way of an Application under section 
227 CrPC, which was also dismissed vide Order dt. 04.01.2024 
passed by the Ld. District & Sessions Judge, Purba. The said Order 
was ultimately challenged before the High Court in Revision, by filing 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
429
Biswajyoti Chatterjee v. State of West Bengal & Anr.
CRR No. 639/2024, which has been dismissed by the High Court 
vide Impugned Order dt. 23.02.2024. 
SUBMISSIONS
8.	
Ld. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Impugned Order 
dt 23.02.2024 passed by the High Court is a non-speaking Order, 
which fails to take into consideration that the relationship between 
the Complainant and the Appellant was ‘consensual’ in nature and 
lasted for over a year. It was submitted that both the Appellant and 
the Complainant had purportedly taken advantage of their social 
relationship and were very well aware of the consequences of their 
actions, being mature adults. At the time of the alleged incident, the 
Appellant was 56 years old, while the Complainant was 36 years 
old, having a child aged 11 years. 
9.	
It was also argued by the Ld. Counsel for the Appellant, that the 
essential ingredient for an offence under Section 376(2)(f) IPC, 
being a false promise to marry, could not be fastened against the 
Appellant when such promise is unenforceable and illegal. The 
Complainant had voluntary entered into a relationship with the 
Appellant, knowing fully that he was still a married man and such an 
acknowledged consensual physical relationship would not constitute 
an offence under Section 376 IPC.1 Further, the ingredients of 
dishonest and fraudulent inducement are clearly absent to further 
constitute an offence of cheating under section 417 IPC, insofar 
as the Complainant was well aware of the personal as well as 
professional background of the Appellant, before entering into a 
consensual relationship with him. 
10.	 Per contra, Sri Gautam Saha, Inspector of Police, CID, West Bengal 
has filed an Affidavit dt. 21.09.2024 on behalf of the State of West 
Bengal, stating that there is material evidence on record to establish 
that the Appellant, while holding the post of ACJM, Haldia had used 
his post to obtain trust of the victim, and had promised to marry 
her. The Appellant took undue advantage of his position and the 
vulnerability of the Complainant/Respondent No. 2 and sexually 
exploited her under the false pretext of marriage. 
1	
Dr. Dhruvaram Muralidha Sonar vs State of Maharashtra [2019] 18 SCC 191
430
Supreme Court Reports
11.	 It was submitted that there is material evidence on record and 
statements of witnesses, Mr. Anup Kumar Malik, (security guard) and 
Mr. Pranab Midda (driver) that the Appellant habitually got into illicit 
relationships with women, and they often acted as an intermediary 
to manage his personal affairs and helping facilitate his relationships. 
The CFSL Report further revealed that the CDR records of mobile 
number 8116704589 and 9851095961 in the name of Minu Khilari 
and Pranav Midda, were being used by the Appellant. The analysis 
of as many as 4 different mobile numbers shows that the mobile 
set bearing IMEI number-355555607033183, which belonged to 
the Appellant, was the common device. Ld. Counsel for the State 
has argued that there is clear consistency between the narration of 
Complainant/Respondent No.2 and the testimonies of the witnesses, 
as well as the material evidence collected during the investigation, 
that a prima facie case under section 376(2)(f)/417/506/120B IPC 
is made out against the Appellant. 
12.	 It was argued that the High Court had rightly dismissed the Revision 
Petition at the stage of discharge, where the Court is not required 
to conduct a mini trial.2 At the time of framing of charges, only a 
prima facie case is to be seen; whereas whether case is beyond 
reasonable doubt, is not to be seen at this stage. It is the assertion 
of the State, that the Appellant must stand the test of trial. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
13.	 We have carefully considered the submissions made by the Learned 
Counsels for the parties and in the present case, the question for 
consideration before the High Court, and subsequently before this 
Hon’ble Court, is that whether the allegations against the Appellant, as 
they stand, constitute an offence, under Sections 376(2)(f), 417 and 
506 IPC; and whether the case of the Appellant is fit for discharge 
under Section 227 CrPC, 1973. 
14.	 A bare perusal of the FIR dt. 14.12.2015, and the statement of the 
Complainant under Section 164 CrPC, clearly establish that Appellant 
and the Complainant had come in contact in the year 2014, during 
the pendency of matrimonial disputes arising out of the Complainant’s 
marriage. It is the own case of the Complainant/Respondent No.2 
2	
Central Bureau of Investigation Vs Aryan Singh [2023] SCC Online SC 379
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
431
Biswajyoti Chatterjee v. State of West Bengal & Anr.
that during the relevant time, the Appellant had duly informed her 
that he was separated from his wife. The Complainant who was well 
aware of the personal as well as the professional background of the 
Appellant, who had been receiving financial help from the Appellant 
for herself and her son, must have carefully weighed her decision 
before entering into a relationship with the Appellant. 
15.	 Even if we take the case of the Complainant at the face value or 
consider that the relationship was based on an offer of marriage, 
the Complainant cannot plead ‘misconception of fact’ or ‘rape on the 
false pretext to marry’. It is from day one that she had knowledge 
and was conscious of the fact, that the Appellant was in a subsisting 
marriage, though separated. It is upon having an active understanding 
of the circumstances, actions and the consequences of the acts, that 
the Complainant made a reasoned choice to sustain a relationship 
with the Appellant. The conduct of the Complainant/Respondent 
No. 2 ex-facie represents a reasoned deliberation, as summarized 
by this Hon’ble Court in Pramod Suryabhan Pawar vs State of 
Maharashtra3 as under:
“18. To summarise the legal position that emerges from 
the above cases, the “consent” of a woman with respect 
to Section 375 must involve an active and reasoned 
deliberation towards the proposed act. To establish whether 
the “consent” was vitiated by a “misconception of fact” 
arising out of a promise to marry, two propositions must 
be established. The promise of marriage must have been 
a false promise, given in bad faith and with no intention 
of being adhered to at the time it was given. The false 
promise itself must be of immediate relevance, or bear 
a direct nexus to the woman’s decision to engage in the 
sexual act.”
16.	 In our considered view, even if the allegations in the FIR and the 
charge-sheet are taken at their face value, it is improbable that the 
Complainant/Respondent No. 2 had engaged in a physical relationship 
with the Appellant, only on account of an assurance of marriage. 
As rightly observed by this Hon’ble Court in the case of Prashant 
3	
[2019] 9 SCC 608
432
Supreme Court Reports
Bharti Vs State of NCT of Delhi,4 that it is inconceivable, that the 
complainant or any woman would continue to meet the Appellant or 
maintain a prolonged association or physical relationship with him 
in the absence of voluntary consent on her part.
17.	 In the case of Uday Vs State of Karnataka,5 the Court had acquitted 
the accused on the basis that she was a mature college student 
who had consented to sexual intercourse with the accused of her 
own free will. It is unlikely that her consent was not based on any 
misconception of fact. In Uday (supra), the Court noted that:
“21. It therefore appears that the consensus of judicial 
opinion is in favour of the view that the consent 
given by the prosecutrix to sexual intercourse with a 
person with whom she is deeply in love on a promise 
that he would marry her on a later date, cannot be 
said to be given under a misconception of fact. A false 
promise is not a fact within the meaning of the Code. We 
are inclined to agree with this view, but we must add that 
there is no straitjacket formula for determining whether 
consent given by the prosecutrix to sexual intercourse is 
voluntary, or whether it is given under a misconception 
of fact. In the ultimate analysis, the tests laid down 
by the courts provide at best guidance to the judicial 
mind while considering a question of consent, but 
the court must, in each case, consider the evidence 
before it and the surrounding circumstances, before 
reaching a conclusion, because each case has its 
own peculiar facts which may have a bearing on 
the question whether the consent was voluntary, 
or was given under a misconception of fact. It must 
also weigh the evidence keeping in view the fact that 
the burden is on the prosecution to prove each and 
every ingredient of the offence, absence of consent 
being one of them.”
18.	 A careful reading of the evidence on record also clearly shows that 
there is no evidence against the Appellant, to conclude that there 
4	
2024 SCC Online SC 3375
5	
(2003) 4 SCC 46
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
433
Biswajyoti Chatterjee v. State of West Bengal & Anr.
was any fraudulent or dishonest inducement of the Complainant 
to constitute an offence under Section 415 IPC. One may argue 
that the Appellant was in a position of power to exert influence, 
however, there is nothing on record to establish ‘inducement’ 
or ‘enticement’. There is also no material on record, that there 
was any threat of injury or reputation to the Complainant. A bare 
allegation that the Appellant had threatened the Complainant or her 
son cannot pass the muster of an offence of criminal intimidation 
under Section 506 IPC. 
19.	 On the other hand, we also find inconsistencies in the statements 
of the prosecutrix insofar as it is deposed by her in the statement 
under section 164 CrPC, that it was only upon the insistence of 
the Appellant, that she had handed over the cases to Advocate, 
Mr. Gopal Chandra Dass; however, the challan/charge-sheet reveals 
that Mr. Gopal Chandra Dass was well known to the Complainant, 
as a senior in college and it was Mr. Gopal Chandra Dass who 
had introduced the Complainant to the Appellant, in respect of her 
pending cases. This, in no manner can be a minor contradiction, 
and casts a suspicion on the entire narrative of the Complainant. 
Notwithstanding, this fact does not in any manner buttress that the 
relationship inter-se between the Appellant and the Complainant, 
was not consensual in nature. 
20.	 We find that there is a growing tendency of resorting to initiation of 
criminal proceedings when relationships turn sour. Every consensual 
relationship, where a possibility of marriage may exist, cannot be 
given a colour of a false pretext to marry, in the event of a fall out. It 
is such lis that amounts to an abuse of process of law, and it is under 
such circumstances, that we deem fit to terminate the proceedings 
at the stage of charge itself. 
21.	 The incident is of the year 2014 and any further litigation, will only 
prolong the suffering of both the parties, who are living their own 
separate lives. 
22.	 In our considered view, considering the factual matrix of the case, 
it is clear that the physical relationship between the Complainant 
and the Appellant was consensual, cannot be said to be without her 
consent or against her will. In light of the aforesaid, we are also of 
the considered opinion that it would be in the interest of justice if 
434
Supreme Court Reports
the proceedings are terminated at this stage itself. Consequently, 
impugned Order of the High Court dated 23.02.2024 passed by the 
Hon’ble High Court of Calcutta in CRR No. 639/2024 is set aside.
23.	 The Criminal Appeal is accordingly allowed. 
24.	 No order as to costs.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan