[2025] 5 S.C.R. 13 : 2025 INSC 449
Jogeswar Sahoo & Ors.  
v. 
The District Judge, Cuttack & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 4989 of 2025)
04 April 2025
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and  
Prashant Kumar Mishra,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether recovery of the amount extended to stenographer Grade-I 
and Personal Assistant, while they were in service, justified after 
their retirement and without affording any opportunity of hearing.
Headnotes†
Service law – Retrospective promotion/appointment – Grant 
of financial benefit – Recovery of excess drawn arrears after 
superannuation of the employees, if permissible – Appellants- 
stenographer Grade-I granted certain financial benefit 
on grant of promotion/appointment retrospectively upon 
upgradation – Appellants superannuated from their posts and 
three years thereafter, the respondent no.1 ordered recovery 
of said amount and directed the appellants to deposit the 
excess drawn arrears, without affording any opportunity of 
hearing – Writ petition by appellants, dismissed by the High 
Court – Sustainability: 
Held: If the excess amount was not paid on account of any 
misrepresentation/fraud by employee or if such excess payment 
was made by the employer by applying a wrong principle for 
calculating the pay/allowance or on the basis of a particular 
interpretation of rule/order, which is subsequently found to be 
erroneous, such excess payments of emoluments or allowances 
are not recoverable – Such relief is not because of any right 
of the employee but in equity, exercising judicial discretion to 
provide relief to the employee from the hardship that would be 
caused if the recovery is ordered – On facts, payment made to the 
appellants was not on account of any fraud or misrepresentation 
by them – It seems, when the financial benefit was extended to the 
* Author
14
Supreme Court Reports
appellants by the District Judge, the same was subsequently not 
approved by High Court which resulted in the subsequent order 
of recovery – Recovery was directed six years after the payment 
was made, and three years after the appellants retired, and that 
too without affording any opportunity of hearing – Appellants 
having superannuated on a ministerial post of Stenographer were 
admittedly not holding any gazetted post – Thus, the recovery 
order is unsustainable, and is set aside. [Paras 9, 11, 12]
Case Law Cited
Thomas Daniel v. State of Kerala & Ors. (2022) SCC online SC 
536 – relied on.
Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana [1994] Supp. 3 SCR 674 : (1995) 
Supp. 1 SCC 18; Shyam Babu Verma v. Union of India [1994] 1 
SCR 700 : (1994) 2 SCC 521; Union of India v. M. Bhaskar [1996] 
Supp. 2 SCR 358 : (1996) 4 SCC 416; V. Gangaram v. Regional 
Jt. Director [1997] 3 SCR 1043 : (1997) 6 SCC 139 – referred to.
List of Keywords
Superannuation; Financial benefit on retrospective promotion/
appointment; Shetty Commission; Erroneous interpretation of rule/
order; Wrong principle for calculating pay/allowance; Stenographer 
Grade-I and Personal Assistant; Retirement; Opportunity of hearing; 
Grant of financial benefit; Recovery of excess drawn arrears after 
superannuation of the employees; Upgradation of Stenographers; 
Misrepresentation/fraud by employee; Excess payments of 
emoluments or allowances; Judicial discretion; Ministerial post of 
Stenographer not gazetted post.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4989 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 09.11.2023 of the High Court 
of Orissa at Cuttack in WP (C) No. 33482 of 2023
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Kedar Nath Tripathy, Aditya Narayan Tripathy, S. Debabrata Reddy.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Joby P. Varghese, Shahid Akhtar, Shovan Mishra, Ms. Bipasa Tripathy.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
15
Jogeswar Sahoo & Ors. v. 
The District Judge, Cuttack & Ors.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Prashant Kumar Mishra, J.
Leave granted. 
2.	
This appeal is directed against the final judgment and order dated 
09.11.2023 passed by the High Court of Orissa at Cuttack in WP (C) 
No. 33482 of 2023 whereunder the High Cout dismissed the appellants’ 
writ petition in which a challenge was made to the orders dated 
12.09.2023 and 08.09.2023 passed by the Special Judge, Special 
Court, Cuttack and Registrar, Civil Courts, Cuttack, as the case may 
be, directing recovery of Rs 26,034/-, Rs.40713/-, Rs. 26539/-, Rs. 
24683/- and Rs. 21,485/-.
3.	
At the relevant time, the appellants were working as Stenographer 
Grade-I and Personal Assistant in the establishment of District Judiciary, 
Cuttack, Orissa. They were granted financial benefit for a sum of Rs 
26,034/-, Rs. 40713/-, Rs. 26539/-, Rs. 24683/- and Rs. 21,485/- by 
way of credit to their account vide Office Order No. 63 dated 10.05.2017 
passed by the District Judge, Cuttack granting promotion/appointment 
retrospectively w.e.f 01.04.2003 consequent upon upgradation of 
the Stenographers in three grades such as Stenographer Grade-I, 
Stenographer Grade-II and Stenographer Grade-III by relying upon 
the recommendations of the respondent no. 1 in compliance towards 
the implementation of the report of the Shetty Commission.
4.	
After grant of such financial benefit, in the year 2017, the appellants 
have superannuated from their respective posts sometimes in the 
year 2020. After three years of their retirement and six years of 
granting the financial benefit, respondent no. 1 ordered for recovery 
of the said amount on the ground that extension of benefit of Shetty 
Commission’s recommendations to the appellants were on an 
erroneous interpretation of such recommendations, therefore, the 
financial benefit granted to them is liable to be recovered and under 
orders dated 12.09.2023 and 08.09.2023, the appellants were directed 
to deposit the excess drawn arrears. Since the orders were passed 
without affording any opportunity of hearing to the appellants, they 
preferred a writ petition before the High Court which came to be 
dismissed under the impugned judgment and order.
16
Supreme Court Reports
5.	
Learned counsel appearing for the appellants argued that the 
appellants were granted financial benefit without there being any 
fraud or misrepresentation by them, therefore, recovery of the amount 
after three years of their retirement is illegal and arbitrary. It is argued 
that the High Court has failed to consider the settled legal position in 
catena of decisions of this Court wherein such recovery from a low 
paid employee after retirement have been held bad in law.
6.	
Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the respondents would 
support the impugned judgment on submission that the appellants 
were not entitled to the financial benefit extended to them and the 
order passed by the District Judge, Cuttack was affirmed by the High 
Court of Orissa in exercise of an administrative power, therefore, the 
recovery is justified. It is also argued that such financial benefit upon 
retrospective promotion was granted with the condition that excess 
amount, if any, paid shall be refunded by the appellants and the 
appellants have furnished their respective undertakings to the said 
effect, therefore, they are estopped from challenging the recovery. 
7.	
The issue falling for our consideration is not about the legality of 
the retrospective promotion and the financial benefit granted to the 
appellants on 10.05.2017. The issue for consideration is whether 
recovery of the amount extended to the appellants while they were in 
service is justified after their retirement and that too without affording 
any opportunity of hearing.
8.	
The law in this regard has been settled by this Court in catena of 
judgments rendered time and again; Sahib Ram vs. State of Haryana,1 
Shyam Babu Verma vs. Union of India,2 Union of India vs. M. 
Bhaskar3 and V. Gangaram vs. Regional Jt. Director4 and in a recent 
decision in the matter of Thomas Daniel vs. State of Kerala & Ors.5.
9.	
This Court has consistently taken the view that if the excess amount 
was not paid on account of any misrepresentation or fraud on the part 
of the employee or if such excess payment was made by the employer 
by applying a wrong principle for calculating the pay/allowance or on the 
basis of a particular interpretation of rule/order, which is subsequently 
1	
(1995) Supp. 1 SCC 18
2	
(1994) 2 SCC 521
3	
(1996) 4 SCC 416 
4	
(1997) 6 SCC 139
5	
(2022) SCC online SC 536
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
17
Jogeswar Sahoo & Ors. v. 
The District Judge, Cuttack & Ors.
found to be erroneous, such excess payments of emoluments or 
allowances are not recoverable. It is held that such relief against the 
recovery is not because of any right of the employee but in equity, 
exercising judicial discretion to provide relief to the employee from 
the hardship that will be caused if the recovery is ordered.
10.	 In Thomas Daniel (supra), this Court has held thus in paras 10, 
11, 12 and 13:
“10. In Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana1 this Court restrained 
recovery of payment which was given under the upgraded 
pay scale on account of wrong construction of relevant order 
by the authority concerned, without any misrepresentation 
on part of the employees. It was held thus:
“5. Admittedly the appellant does not possess 
the required educational qualifications. Under the 
circumstances the appellant would not be entitled 
to the relaxation. The Principal erred in granting 
him the relaxation. Since the date of relaxation, 
the appellant had been paid his salary on the 
revised scale. However, it is not on account of 
any misrepresentation made by the appellant 
that the benefit of the higher pay scale was 
given to him but by wrong construction made by 
the Principal for which the appellant cannot be 
held to be at fault. Under the circumstances the 
amount paid till date may not be recovered from 
the appellant. The principle of equal pay for equal 
work would not apply to the scales prescribed by 
the University Grants Commission. The appeal 
is allowed partly without any order as to costs.”
11. In Col. B.J. Akkara (Retd.) v. Government of India2 this 
Court considered an identical question as under:
“27. The last question to be considered is 
whether relief should be granted against the 
recovery of the excess payments made on 
account of the wrong interpretation/understanding 
of the circular dated 7-6-1999. This Court has 
consistently granted relief against recovery 
18
Supreme Court Reports
of excess wrong payment of emoluments/
allowances from an employee, if the following 
conditions are fulfilled (vide Sahib Ram v. State 
of Haryana [1995 Supp (1) SCC 18 : 1995 
SCC (L&S) 248], Shyam Babu Verma v. Union 
of India [(1994) 2 SCC 521 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 
683 : (1994) 27 ATC 121], Union of India v. M. 
Bhaskar [(1996) 4 SCC 416 : 1996 SCC (L&S) 
967] and V. Gangaram v. Regional Jt. Director 
[(1997) 6 SCC 139 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 1652]):
(a) The excess payment was not made on 
account of any misrepresentation or fraud on 
the part of the employee.
(b) Such excess payment was made by the 
employer by applying a wrong principle for 
calculating the pay/allowance or on the basis of 
a particular interpretation of rule/order, which is 
subsequently found to be erroneous.
28. Such relief, restraining back recovery of 
excess payment, is granted by courts not because 
of any right in the employees, but in equity, 
in exercise of judicial discretion to relieve the 
employees from the hardship that will be caused 
if recovery is implemented. A government servant, 
particularly one in the lower rungs of service 
would spend whatever emoluments he receives 
for the upkeep of his family. If he receives an 
excess payment for a long period, he would 
spend it, genuinely believing that he is entitled 
to it. As any subsequent action to recover the 
excess payment will cause undue hardship to 
him, relief is granted in that behalf. But where 
the employee had knowledge that the payment 
received was in excess of what was due or 
wrongly paid, or where the error is detected or 
corrected within a short time of wrong payment, 
courts will not grant relief against recovery. The 
matter being in the realm of judicial discretion, 
courts may on the facts and circumstances of 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
19
Jogeswar Sahoo & Ors. v. 
The District Judge, Cuttack & Ors.
any particular case refuse to grant such relief 
against recovery.
29. On the same principle, pensioners can also 
seek a direction that wrong payments should 
not be recovered, as pensioners are in a more 
disadvantageous position when compared to 
in-service employees. Any attempt to recover 
excess wrong payment would cause undue 
hardship to them. The petitioners are not guilty 
of any misrepresentation or fraud in regard 
to the excess payment. NPA was added to 
minimum pay, for purposes of stepping up, due 
to a wrong understanding by the implementing 
departments. We are therefore of the view that 
the respondents shall not recover any excess 
payments made towards pension in pursuance 
of the circular dated 7-6-1999 till the issue of 
the clarificatory circular dated 11-9-2001. Insofar 
as any excess payment made after the circular 
dated 11-9-2001, obviously the Union of India 
will be entitled to recover the excess as the 
validity of the said circular has been upheld 
and as pensioners have been put on notice in 
regard to the wrong calculations earlier made.”
12. In Syed Abdul Qadir v. State of Bihar3 excess payment 
was sought to be recovered which was made to the 
appellants-teachers on account of mistake and wrong 
interpretation of prevailing Bihar Nationalised Secondary 
School (Service Conditions) Rules, 1983. The appellants 
therein contended that even if it were to be held that the 
appellants were not entitled to the benefit of additional 
increment on promotion, the excess amount should not 
be recovered from them, it having been paid without any 
misrepresentation or fraud on their part. The Court held 
that the appellants cannot be held responsible in such a 
situation and recovery of the excess payment should not be 
ordered, especially when the employee has subsequently 
retired. The court observed that in general parlance, 
recovery is prohibited by courts where there exists no 
20
Supreme Court Reports
misrepresentation or fraud on the part of the employee 
and when the excess payment has been made by applying 
a wrong interpretation/understanding of a Rule or Order. 
It was held thus:
“59. Undoubtedly, the excess amount that has 
been paid to the appellant teachers was not 
because of any misrepresentation or fraud 
on their part and the appellants also had no 
knowledge that the amount that was being paid 
to them was more than what they were entitled 
to. It would not be out of place to mention here 
that the Finance Department had, in its counter-
affidavit, admitted that it was a bona fide mistake 
on their part. The excess payment made was 
the result of wrong interpretation of the Rule that 
was applicable to them, for which the appellants 
cannot be held responsible. Rather, the whole 
confusion was because of inaction, negligence 
and carelessness of the officials concerned 
of the Government of Bihar. Learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the appellant teachers 
submitted that majority of the beneficiaries have 
either retired or are on the verge of it. Keeping 
in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of 
the case at hand and to avoid any hardship to 
the appellant teachers, we are of the view that 
no recovery of the amount that has been paid 
in excess to the appellant teachers should be 
made.”
13. In State of Punjab v. Rafiq Masih (White Washer)4 
wherein this court examined the validity of an order 
passed by the State to recover the monetary gains wrongly 
extended to the beneficiary employees in excess of their 
entitlements without any fault or misrepresentation at the 
behest of the recipient. This Court considered situations 
of hardship caused to an employee, if recovery is directed 
to reimburse the employer and disallowed the same, 
exempting the beneficiary employees from such recovery. 
It was held thus:
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
21
Jogeswar Sahoo & Ors. v. 
The District Judge, Cuttack & Ors.
“8. As between two parties, if a determination 
is rendered in favour of the party, which is the 
weaker of the two, without any serious detriment 
to the other (which is truly a welfare State), 
the issue resolved would be in consonance 
with the concept of justice, which is assured to 
the citizens of India, even in the Preamble of 
the Constitution of India. The right to recover 
being pursued by the employer, will have to be 
compared, with the effect of the recovery on the 
employee concerned. If the effect of the recovery 
from the employee concerned would be, more 
unfair, more wrongful, more improper, and more 
unwarranted, than the corresponding right of the 
employer to recover the amount, then it would 
be iniquitous and arbitrary, to effect the recovery. 
In such a situation, the employee’s right would 
outbalance, and therefore eclipse, the right of 
the employer to recover.
xxxxxxxxx
18. It is not possible to postulate all situations 
of hardship which would govern employees on 
the issue of recovery, where payments have 
mistakenly been made by the employer, in excess 
of their entitlement. Be that as it may, based on 
the decisions referred to hereinabove, we may, as 
a ready reference, summarise the following few 
situations, wherein recoveries by the employers, 
would be impermissible in law:
(i) Recovery from the employees belonging to 
Class III and Class IV service (or Group C and 
Group D service).
(ii) Recovery from the retired employees, or the 
employees who are due to retire within one year, 
of the order of recovery.
(iii) Recovery from the employees, when the 
excess payment has been made for a period in 
excess of five years, before the order of recovery 
is issued.
22
Supreme Court Reports
(iv) Recovery in cases where an employee has 
wrongfully been required to discharge duties of a 
higher post, and has been paid accordingly, even 
though he should have rightfully been required 
to work against an inferior post.
(v) In any other case, where the court arrives 
at the conclusion, that recovery if made from 
the employee, would be iniquitous or harsh or 
arbitrary to such an extent, as would far outweigh 
the equitable balance of the employer’s right to 
recover.”
11.	 In the case at hand, the appellants were working on the post of 
Stenographers when the subject illegal payment was made to them. 
It is not reflected in the record that such payment was made to the 
appellants on account of any fraud or misrepresentation by them. It 
seems, when the financial benefit was extended to the appellants 
by the District Judge, Cuttack, the same was subsequently not 
approved by the High Court which resulted in the subsequent order 
of recovery. It is also not in dispute that the payment was made 
in the year 2017 whereas the recovery was directed in the year 
2023. However, in the meanwhile, the appellants have retired in the 
year 2020. It is also an admitted position that the appellants were 
not afforded any opportunity of hearing before issuing the order of 
recovery. The appellants having superannuated on a ministerial post 
of Stenographer were admittedly not holding any gazetted post as 
such applying the principle enunciated by this Court in the above 
quoted judgment, the recovery is found unsustainable.
12.	 For the aforestated, we are of the considered view that the appeal 
deserves to be allowed. Accordingly, we allow the appeal and set 
aside the order of the High Court and in consequence the orders 
dated 12.09.2023 and 08.09.2023 by which the appellants were 
directed to deposit the excess drawn arrears are set aside
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain