[2025] 7 S.C.R. 160 : 2025 INSC 657
Renuka Prasad 
v. 
The State Represented by  
Assistant Superintendent of Police
(Criminal Appeal No(s). 3189-3190 of 2023)
09 May 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia and K. Vinod Chandran,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court erred in reversing the acquittal and 
convicting the accused persons based on the testimony of the 
IOs which was founded only on s.161, CrPC statements of the 
witnesses; whether present was a case of two probable views, in 
which case the one favourable to the accused ought to be taken.
Headnotes†
Appeal against acquittal – Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – 
s.161 – Penal Code, 1860 – s.302 r/w s.120B – Murder – 71 
out of the total 87 witnesses including eye-witnesses turned 
hostile – Trial Court acquitted the accused persons – High 
Court reversed the acquittal and convicted the accused relying 
on the testimony of the IOs based only on the statements of 
the witnesses recorded u/s.161, CrPC – Sustainability: 
Held: Unsustainable – High Court erred in relying on the statements 
made by the witnesses u/s.161, CrPC as affirmed by the IO, in 
violation of s.162, CrPC – What is revealed in the investigation to 
the IO has to be clearly established before Court by oral testimony 
or other evidence, failing which the Court cannot base a conviction 
on the predilection of the IO that a particular circumstance was 
revealed in the investigation – Statements made by the IOs 
regarding the motive, conspiracy and preparation comes out as 
the prosecution story, as discernible from the s.161 statements 
of various witnesses who were questioned by the police during 
investigation; which statements are wholly inadmissible u/s.162, 
CrPC – Merely because the IOs spoke of such statements having 
been made by the witnesses during investigation, does not give 
* Author
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
161
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
them any credibility, enabling acceptance, unless the witnesses 
themselves spoke of such motive or acts of commission or 
omission or instances from which conspiracy could be inferred 
as also the preparation, established beyond reasonable doubt – 
High Court reversed the order of acquittal of the Trial Court on 
mere surmises and conjectures relying wholly on the testimony 
of the IOs, who merely regurgitated the statements recorded 
u/s.161 and the voluntary statements of the accused – Prosecution 
failed to prove the allegations raised and charged against each 
accused – Judgment of the High Court reversed, accused acquitted. 
[Paras 14, 19, 26, 48, 49]
Appeal against acquittal – Murder – Hostile witnesses – Trial 
Court acquitted the accused persons – High Court reversed 
the acquittal – Whether present was a case of two probable 
views, in which case the one favourable to the accused ought 
to be taken:
Held: No – In the present case, there are no two views coming 
forth from the evidence – The only view that comes forth is that 
the prosecution failed to prove the allegations raised and charged 
against each of the accused, more by reason of all the witnesses 
turning hostile for reasons unknown – Whatever be the reason 
behind such hostility, it cannot result in a conviction, based on 
the testimony of the IOs which is founded only on s.161, CrPC 
statements and voluntary statements of accused; the former 
violative of s.162, CrPC and the latter in breach of ss.25, 26, 
Evidence Act – Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – ss.161, 162 – 
Evidence Act, 1872 – ss.25-27. [Para 48]
Evidence Act, 1872 – ss.25-27, 30 – Confession u/s.27 not 
relied upon:
Held: Confessions allegedly made by A1 regarding the sites where 
the conspiracy was hatched and the money transacted does not lead 
to any discovery of fact – The narration about the conspiracy and the 
money transactions are not admissible and the mere pointing out of 
two sites does not lead to any discovery of fact, when the narration 
is eschewed – The clothes and machetes allegedly, worn by A5 & 
A6 and used by them to commit the crime, were recovered on the 
confession statement of A3, the alleged conspirator – However, 
162
Supreme Court Reports
neither the clothes nor machetes are connected to A5 & A6 who 
were alleged to have committed the crime nor is A3, an alleged 
conspirator even accused of having been involved in the crime 
proper, that is the murder of the deceased – Confession u/s.27 
cannot be relied upon and no aid can be drawn from it to implicate 
the other accused – The sites pointed out by A1, did not lead to 
any discovery of a fact and it is hit by ss.25 and 26 . [Paras 39, 45]
Case Law Cited
Govt. of NCT of Delhi v. Sunil [2000] Supp. 5 SCR 144 : (2001) 
1 SCC 652; Rizwan Khan v. State of Chhattisgarh [2020] 7 SCR 
546 : (2020) 9 SCC 627 – distinguished.
Ramesh v. State of Haryana [2016] 8 SCR 936 : (2017) 1 SCC 
529; Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka [2007] 2 SCR 630 : (2007) 
4 SCC 415; State, State of H.P. v. Pardeep Kumar [2018] 2 SCR 
656 : (2018) 13 SCC 808; State of Bombay v. Kathi Kalu Oghad 
[1962] 3 SCR 10; Mohd. Khalid v. State of W.B. [2002] Supp. 2 
SCR 31 : (2002) 7 SCC 334; Mehboob Ali v. State of Rajasthan 
[2015] 10 SCR 553 : (2016) 14 SCC 640; Kali Ram v. State of 
H.P. [1974] 1 SCR 722 : (1973) 2 SCC 808; R. Shaji v. State of 
Kerala [2013] 3 SCR 1172 : (2013) 14 SCC 266; Rajendra Singh v. 
State of U.P. [2007] 8 SCR 834 : (2007) 7 SCC 378; State (NCT 
of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu [2005] Supp. 2 SCR 79 : (2005) 11 
SCC 600; H.P. Admn. v. Om Prakash [1972] 2 SCR 765 : (1972) 
1 SCC 249; State of Maharashtra v. Damu [2000] 3 SCR 880 : 
(2000) 6 SCC 269; Rumi Bora Dutta v. State of Assam [2013] 3 
SCR 801 : (2013) 7 SCC 417; Raja v. State of Haryana [2015] 
3 SCR 947 : (2015) 11 SCC 43; Pandurang Kalu Patil v. State 
of Maharashtra [2002] 1 SCR 338 : (2002) 2 SCC 490; John 
Pandian  v. State [2010] 15 SCR 1012 : (2010) 14 SCC 129; 
Kashmira Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh [1952] 1 SCR 526 : 
(1952) 1 SCC 275; Haricharan Kurmi v. State of Bihar [1964] 6 
SCR 623; State v. Chhaganlal Gangaram Lavar, 1954 SCC OnLine 
Bom 69 – referred to.
Athappa Goundan, In re, 1937 SCC OnLine Mad 76; Naresh 
Chandra Das v. King-Emperor, 1941 SCC OnLine Cal 178 – 
referred to.
Pulukuri Kottaya v. Emperor, AIR 1947 PC 67 – referred to.
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
163
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Evidence Act, 1872; Criminal Procedure Code, 
1973.
List of Keywords
Appeal against acquittal; Testimony of the Investigating Officers 
(IOs); Testimony of IO founded only on Section 161, CrPC 
statements of the witnesses; Conviction based on the testimony of 
the IOs based only on Section 161, CrPC statements; Statements 
made by the witnesses under Section 161, CrPC; Witnesses 
turning hostile; Hostility of witnesses at trial; Eye-witnesses turned 
hostile; Sibling rivalry; Section 27, Evidence Act, 1872; Failed to 
identify the assailants; Homicidal death; Conspiracy; Confession; 
Motive; Preparation; Two reasonable views possible; No two views; 
Presumption of innocence of the accused until proved guilty; 
Voluntary statements of accused; Discovery of a fact; Recovery 
of the machetes, the weapons used in the offence; Recovery of 
the clothes; Seizure of currency; Test identification parade (TIP); 
Seizures and recoveries; Prosecution failed to prove the allegations 
raised and charged.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No(s). 
3189-3190 of 2023
From the Judgment and Order dated 27.09.2023 and 05.10.2023 of 
the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in CRLA No. 870 of 2017
With
Criminal Appeal No(s). 3399 and 85-86 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Ratnakar Dash, Siddharth Luthra, Sr. Advs., G.Sivabalamurugan, 
Selvaraj Mahendran, C.adhikesavan, Ms. Ratan Priya Pradhan, 
Harikrishnan P.v, C.kavin Ananth, Mrs. Vaijayanthi Girish, Girish 
Ananthamurthy, Ayush Kaushik, Sougat Pati.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Aman Panwar, A.A.G., V. N. Raghupathy, Shrey Brahmbhatt.
164
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K. Vinod Chandran, J.
1.	
Prevaricating witnesses, turning hostile in Court and overzealous 
investigations, done in total ignorance of basic tenets of criminal law, 
often reduces prosecution to a mockery. Witnesses mount the box 
to disown prior statements, deny recoveries made, feign ignorance 
of aggravating circumstances spoken of during investigation and 
eye witnesses turn blind. Here is a classic case of 71 of the total 
87 witnesses including eye-witnesses, turning hostile, leaving the 
prosecution to stand on the testimony of the police and official 
witnesses. Even a young boy, the crucial eyewitness, who saw his 
father being hacked to death, failed to identify the assailants. 
2.	
The prosecution alleged that due to differences arising from sharing of 
assets of the father; an entrepreneur who set up several educational 
institutions, A1 and his brother, PW4, were at loggerheads. The 
deceased an employee of one of the institutions, later allotted to 
the share of A1, resigned to join an institution managed by PW4, 
after the division of assets. The enmity of A1 arises, according to 
the prosecution, due to the active involvement of the deceased in 
the sibling rivalry, aligning himself with PW4, to the hilt. A1 along 
with his employees A2 to A4 engaged A5 and A6, through A7, an 
Advocate, to murder the deceased. A5 and A6 is said to have carried 
out the brutal murder, hacking the deceased to death, in front of his 
son, PW8, at 07:45 pm on 28.04.2011. PW8, immediately contacted 
his relatives and the deceased was rushed to the hospital where he 
breathed his last at 08:40 pm on the same day. 
3.	
The first information statement (FIS) was lodged by PW8, leading to 
the registration of the crime and the resultant investigation. As was 
said, 87 witnesses were led in trial to speak about the homicide, the 
motive, the meeting of minds leading to the conspiracy, the preparation, 
what transpired after the incident and the arrest, recovery, chemical 
analysis and so on and so forth; all in vain for most turned hostile, 
especially the ones who were relevant. The Trial Court acquitted the 
accused finding no support for the prosecution case from the large 
number of witnesses arrayed to prove the various aspects leading to 
the murder, all of whom, except the official witnesses, turned hostile. 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
165
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
The Division Bench of the High Court reversed the acquittal and 
convicted A1 to A6 under Section 302 read with Section 120-B of 
the Indian Penal Code, 1860. The acquittal of A7 by the Trial Court 
was affirmed by the High Court.
4.	
A1 has filed one of the appeals in which Mr. Siddharth Luthra, learned 
Senior Counsel, appeared for the accused/appellant. Mr. Ratnakar 
Dash, learned Senior Counsel appeared in the other appeals filed 
by A2 to A6. Mr. Aman Panwar, learned Additional Advocate General 
appeared for the State. Heard both the learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the appellants and the learned Additional Advocate 
General and perused the records.
5.	
The Division Bench at the outset, dealt with the judgment in 
Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka1 wherein this Court had set 
out the general principles regarding powers of the Appellate Court 
in dealing with an appeal from an acquittal. The principles are trite; 
extract having been made in the impugned judgment, we would not 
repeat. We are tasked to find out whether the principles have been 
followed scrupulously by the Division Bench in setting aside the order 
of acquittal. Whether, while exercising the full power conferred in an 
appeal to review, reappreciate and consider the evidence led in the 
case, the Division Bench has been circumspect, keeping in mind 
the trite fundamental principle that the presumption of innocence 
available to the accused, under the general law, stands fortified and 
strengthened by reason of the order of acquittal. Whether, the Trial 
Court has been absolutely unreasonable in taking a view that there 
was insufficient evidence to bring home a conviction in the case and 
whether it was a case of two probable views, in which case the one 
favourable to the accused ought to be taken.
6.	
PW8 is the eyewitness who spoke of the incident but failed to 
identify the assailants or the weapons recovered, despite the FIS 
having categorically stated his ability to identify them, who suddenly 
came out of the bushes; when he and his father were taking a stroll, 
brutally hacked his father and fled on their foot. While MO6 and 
MO7, spectacles and mobile of the deceased seized by the police 
from the scene of occurrence, was identified, the witness could 
neither identify either of the appellants; A5 and A6. The weapons 
1	
(2007) 4 SCC 415
166
Supreme Court Reports
were not even confronted to PW8, since he expressed his inability 
to identify them. PW8’s knowledge of the motive, spoken of in the 
statement under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C, was denied. PW 1 & 
PW9 were the persons who came to the scene of occurrence, as per 
the prosecution case, immediately after the incident, who also saw 
two persons running away. PW1 completely denied his presence at 
the scene of occurrence, while PW9 spoke only of having seen one 
person running away. PW9 deposed of seeing the injured and his 
son, the latter of whom was advised to call relatives. He called the 
Police and summoned an ambulance, but even before its arrival, the 
injured was taken to the hospital in a pick-up van. The statement 
made by PW1 and PW9, under Section 161, regarding their ability to 
identify the persons who were running away and their awareness of 
the motive; being residents of the locality and the conspiracy having 
been hatched by reason of the sibling rivalry of prominent persons 
of the locality, were all denied.
7.	
PW2, the brother of the deceased, PW3, his uncle and PW10, his 
wife, were examined to prove the inquest and also the motive. All of 
them saw the injured at the hospital, spoke of the injuries numbering 
twenty-five, admitted of the inquest and identified the dress and 
other personal effects of the deceased, seized by the police from 
the body. PW2, though spoke of his brother’s employment with A1 
and subsequent resignation due to a disagreement, did not support 
the prosecution case of an active enmity between the deceased 
and A1 by reason of the allegiance to PW4, the brother of A1; a 
departure from his Section 161 statement. Curiously, the wife of 
the deceased also denied her statement to the police that A1 had 
insulted and threatened the deceased. PW3 was the uncle of the 
deceased who along with PW2 and PW10 saw the deceased at the 
hospital. There were a number of witnesses examined to prove the 
motive, the conspiracy and the incidental circumstances, leading 
eventually to the murder of the deceased, all of whom turned hostile. 
The Appellate Court though accepted that all these witnesses turned 
hostile, looked at the story projected by the prosecution as spoken of 
in the Section 161 statements of the witnesses, which the witnesses 
did not accept, in the box, at the trial before Court.
8.	
PW4, the brother of A1, to whom was aligned the deceased, and 
a star witness to speak on the motive, admitted the division of 
the properties between the brothers but denied any long-standing 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
167
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
enmity between them. He also denied that he wrote a letter to his 
father complaining about the actions of A1. A photocopy of the said 
letter confronted to him, at the trial, was denied, though he admitted 
that the signature seen therein was similar to his. The effort of the 
prosecution to prove the various aspects leading to the crime and 
what happened afterwards; (i) of the conspiracy; hatched through 
the meetings carried out by the accused, purportedly to prove the 
meeting of minds, the inquiries made to find out the contract killers, 
persons approached for owning up the crime; (ii) preparation; like, 
the purchase of machetes, procurement of fake number plates to 
be affixed in a motorbike and pick up van, used to escape from 
the crime scene and reach the hide out; and the (iii) motive itself; 
through employees of the Medical College, PW57 to PW62 & PW72, 
including the Administrative Superintendent and the Principal of the 
College, to establish the enmity between A1 and PW4, all of which 
collapsed like a pack of cards, when all of these witnesses turned 
hostile. The motive, conspiracy, preparation made before, and what 
transpired after the crime, as projected by the prosecution remained 
a mere scripted story as discernible from the Section 161 statements; 
not established in the trial.
9.	
Surprisingly, all the panch witnesses who attested the various 
recoveries, like cash seized from A2 to A5, the weapons used, and 
the clothes worn by the accused, when the crime was committed, 
also turned hostile. We will deal with Exhibit P49, recovery of the 
machetes, the weapons used in the offence and Exhibit P50, recovery 
of the clothes worn by A5 and A6 at the time of the crime, a little 
later, which has to be considered along with the FSL report and 
the result of analysis coming forth. We also notice that there were 
two Mahazars produced as Annexure P51 and P54, wherein A1 
allegedly confessed and pointed out the place where the conspiracy 
was carried out and the money transfer occurred. This, however, 
is not a confession under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872, since there was no tangible object recovered from the two 
sites pointed out, leading to the discovery of a fact. The confession 
statement regarding the conspiracy, of course cannot at all be relied 
upon, being hit by Sections 25 & 26 of the Evidence Act. The other 
witnesses examined to prove the aggravating circumstances also 
turned hostile in which event the Court turned to the evidence of the 
Investigating Officers, PW’s 83, 84 and 87.
168
Supreme Court Reports
10.	 Commencing the analysis of evidence the High Court first held that 
undisputedly Ramkrishna met with a homicidal death, which is also 
the conclusion of the Trial Court from which there is no reason for 
us to differ. The evidence of PW8, who was an eye witness and 
PW9, who saw the hacked body of the deceased immediately after 
the incident, coupled with the evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 10, brother, 
uncle and wife, who saw the body of the deceased at the hospital and 
spoke of the injuries sustained, clearly established the brutal attack 
on the deceased. The post-mortem report and the cause of death 
as spoken of by the Doctor, PW74, also established the homicidal 
death caused by the cutting wounds inflicted on the deceased, which 
were also ante-mortem. We need not further deal with the issue and 
fully agree with the Trial Court and the High Court that the deceased 
was brutally murdered.
11.	 The High Court having found that all the witnesses except the 
official witnesses turned hostile looked at the evidence of the official 
witnesses especially the Investigating Officers and the recoveries 
made in the course of investigation. The High Court also relied on 
two decisions of this Court, State, Govt. of NCT of Delhi v. Sunil2 
and Rizwan Khan v. State of Chhattisgarh3 to find that the courts 
need not always feed on a distrust of police officers. We have to 
emphasize that the proposition coming out of the said decisions were 
in the context of recoveries made under Section 27 of the Evidence 
Act or the seizures effected on search or interception. 
12.	 In Sunil and another2, the recovery of a blood-stained knickers 
was eschewed by the High Court since there were no independent 
witnesses. A distinction was drawn from a case of recovery, under 
information supplied by the accused and a discovery made on a 
search, where there is an insistence on having independent witnesses, 
under Chapter VII of the Code. It was held that it is fallacious to hold 
that every recovery under Section 27 must necessarily be attested by 
independent witnesses and it is for the Police Officer to have such 
witnesses present to provide further veracity to the recovery. But there 
could be circumstances in which there were no witnesses present or 
none had agreed to affix his signature on the mahazar, which cannot 
always lead to the evidence of recovery being eschewed, especially 
2	
(2001) 1 SCC 652
3	
(2020) 9 SCC 627
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
169
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
when the testimony of the Police Officer is not shown to be tainted 
in any manner and is also found to be credible. It was held that it 
is archaic and a colonial hangover that actions of the Police Officer 
should be approached with primal distrust, always. Rizwan Khan3 
was a three Judge Bench decision which affirmed Sunil & another2 
to hold that if the police witnesses are found to be reliable and trust 
worthy, no error can be attributed to the conviction entered relying 
upon such testimony. Therein, it was a case of recovery of a narcotic 
substance from a motor-cycle in which the accused were travelling, 
search having been conducted on interception of the vehicle. The 
panchnama witnesses turned hostile but the evidence of the Police 
Officers, found to be trust worthy was relied upon. 
13.	 State of H.P. v. Pardeep Kumar4, again was a case in which 
there were no independent witnesses to attest the recovery of the 
contraband, since none were available due to the severe cold on 
that day. The conviction was based on the testimony of seizure of 
contraband from the accused, as testified by the Police Officers. 
We cannot digress from the above proposition as laid-down by this 
Court but only raise a caution, insofar the recovery made under 
Section 27, in the context of the findings of the High Court, in the 
instant case, having to be necessarily connected to the crime and 
the accused, failing which the recovery is of no consequence. We 
also have to observe that the confession can only be with respect 
to the discovery of a fact leading to the recovery of a material object 
and cannot be with respect to any confession as to the actual crime 
as has been held in Pulukuri Kottaya v. Emperor5. 
14.	 The High Court having stated the principle, went on to examine the 
evidence of PW’s 83, 84 and 87. PW83 commenced the investigation, 
to whom was handed over the letter, MO40, allegedly written by PW4 
to his father; which however, was denied by PW4 in his testimony. 
The High Court discussing PW83’s evidence specifically referred 
to the Section 161 statements made by PWs 1, 5, 6, 9, 12, 13, 26 
and 51, which were affirmed to have been made by them before the 
Police as spoken of by PW83. Observing that in cross-examination of 
PW83 but for general suggestions, which were denied by him there 
was nothing to discredit him and hence the testimony of PW83 is 
4	
(2018) 13 SCC 808
5	
AIR 1947 PC 67
170
Supreme Court Reports
not affected, the Division Bench held there is no reason to discard 
it. We are afraid that the High Court seriously erred in relying on the 
statements made by the witnesses under Section 161, as affirmed 
by the Investigating Officer, clearly in violation of Section 162 and 
the specific use to which Section 161 statements can be put to, 
as we will further elaborate, a little later. It’s also pertinent that the 
conspiracy angle spoken of by PW83, is what has been stated to 
him by A7, clearly inadmissible in evidence.
15.	 The evidence of PW84 with respect to seizure of currency worth 
Rs.8,50,000/- and two mobile phones respectively from the staff 
quarters of A5 and the person of A6, on information, the source of 
which has not been disclosed was emphasised. The arrest of A3, 
the seizure of Rs.2,00,000/- and a mobile phone from A3 were also 
relied on. The Trial Court had placed no reliance on these recoveries 
finding it to be not admissible under Section 27; which the High Court 
was not impressed with and found it to be permissible under Section 
102 of Cr.P.C. Seizure under Section 102, unless it is linked to the 
crime cannot be relied on to convict the accused for murder on the 
conspiracy alleged. But more relevant is the fact that only the bundles 
of the money recovered were identified in Court, by PW78, an ASI 
who accompanied PW84 at the time of seizure and PW84, since 
there was no proper inventory taken of the cash recovered. Further 
though PW84 spoke of the cash recovered being in bundles with 
slips showing the name of the banks, no attempt was made to find 
out its source from the Banks. The money hence was not connected 
to the crime and the Call Data Records of the mobile phones were 
not proved in the trial. 
16.	 Now we come to the IO, who concluded the investigation and filed 
charge-sheet, PW87, before whom A3, A5 and A6 were produced 
by PW84, after which the investigation was carried out by PW87. It 
was PW87’s testimony that the voluntary statements of A3 led to A2, 
from whose staff quarters Rs.2,58,000/- and two mobile phones were 
recovered. A1 was also arrested, who is said to have given statements 
about his enmity with PW4 and also the deceased. These voluntary 
statements and the confession statements of A3, under Section 
27 also led PW87 to Amarajyothi Farms, from where the weapons 
(MO 10 & MO 11) and a motorcycle (MO 49) were recovered as per 
Ex.P49 Mahazar and MO12 to MO15 clothes worn by A5 & A6 were 
recovered as per Ex.P113, Mahazar. PW87’s testimony also spoke 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
171
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
about PW5 who was close to the deceased having spoken of the 
enmity between A1 and PW4; denied in Court by PW5. A reading 
of PW87’s statement would reveal that she has just spoken of the 
voluntary statements made by the various accused and there is no 
investigation worthy of reliance spoken of by the witness. We are 
reminded of the extract in State of Bombay v. Kathi Kalu Oghad6, 
an eleven Judge Bench, of a quote attributed to Sir James Fitzjames 
Stephen, the principal draftsman of the Evidence Act:
“If it is permissible in law to obtain evidence from the 
accused person by compulsion, why tread the hard path 
of laborious investigation and prolonged examination of 
other men, materials and documents? It has been well said 
that an abolition of this privilege would be an incentive for 
those in charge of enforcement of law “to sit comfortably 
in the shade rubbing red pepper into a poor devil’s eyes 
rather than to go about in the sun hunting up evidence”. 
(Stephen, History of Criminal Law, p. 442)
17.	 The High Court has placed heavy reliance on the testimonies of PW’s 
83, 84 and 87, the IOs, with the assertion that they were unshaken 
in cross-examination and reliance was placed on the affirmation of 
the statements made by the witnesses under Section 161, which 
the witnesses did not speak themselves in the box, at the trial. We 
cannot but observe that, though reliance is said to be placed on 
the testimony of the IOs’ this would in fact be a reliance placed on 
Section 161 statements as spoken of by the IOs which is egregiously 
wrong. The High Court in paragraph 85 speaks of the affirmation of 
statements given by witnesses examined by PW87 and records that 
though these were denied by the witnesses, a reading of the cross-
examination of PW87 indicates that she had not been discredited 
and the suggestions made to her in cross were denied. The reliance 
placed on the so called voluntary statements of the accused and the 
statements made under Section 161 as recorded by PW87, based 
on the decisions afore-cited cannot be countenanced. 
18.	 As we noticed, the decisions cited by the High Court regarding the 
testimony of the Police Officers before Court not liable to be treated 
6	
(1962) 3 SCR 10
172
Supreme Court Reports
with distrust, was specifically with respect to recoveries made 
under Section 27 and the seizures of contraband. Seizure often is 
on surprise interception or on information received, which principle 
cannot be imported to the affirmation of the statements made by 
the witnesses during investigation under Section 161; if they do not 
subscribe to it at trial. Merely for the IO having spoken about such 
a statement having been made, it cannot be treated as gospel truth. 
Nor can the voluntary statements of the accused relied on except 
to the extent of the discovery of fact, on information supplied, which 
would be a strong implicating circumstance if, and only if, there is 
a link established to the crime. 
19.	 In this context, we also have to specifically notice paragraph 86 
where some of the responses by PW87 were discussed to add 
further credibility to her testimony; which in fact runs counter 
to the prosecution case. The test identification parade had not 
given any result, which was stated to be not an argument against 
the prosecution. We perfectly agree, since even if there was an 
identification at the stage of investigation, as per the precedents, it 
only aids the investigation and cannot lead to a conviction, unless 
the accused are identified in the box at the time of trial, in Court, 
which in the present case has not occurred. PW87 admitted to a 
suggestion that when she interrogated the family members of the 
deceased, none talked about the existing differences between the 
deceased and A1. The said admission was rubbished on the ground 
that, to another suggestion in the same vein, PW87 firmly denied 
it and this was because her investigation revealed involvement of 
A1; a presumptuous finding without any legal basis. What has been 
revealed in the investigation, to the IO, has to be clearly established 
before Court by oral testimony or other evidence, failing which the 
Court cannot base a conviction on the predilection of the IO that a 
particular circumstance was revealed in the investigation. 
20.	 The discrepancy regarding the statements made by her with respect 
to the clothes of A5 and A6 was attempted to be explained away. 
We would not dwell on the discrepancy since nothing comes out of 
the recovery made under Section 27. The recovery was made on a 
confession statement by A3 and not A5 or A6. Further, the statement 
attributed to A3 as spoken of by PW 87 marked as exhibit P 113 
is “The machetes used in this murder is kept in a gunny bag in the 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
173
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
last room of the first floor of the farmhouse of Renuka Prasad at 
Ajjavara-Addangaya-Mavinapalla. The blood-stain clothes which 
were worn by Sharan and Bhavani Shankar during the offence and 
the Kannada number plate which was affixed to the Hero Honda 
Splendour bike during the offence are kept near the water pump in 
a plastic cover; and if you come with me, I will show them to you.” 
(sic) The reference to murder and offence has to be completely 
eschewed and the fact discovered is only the concealment of the 
weapons and the dress which information supplied is by A3 who even 
according to the prosecution, was not involved in the crime proper, of 
murder. Further, while recording the Mahazar for recovery, the shirt 
and pants recovered were said to be of A5 and a shirt and jeans 
of A6. Nothing was done to verify whether MO12 – MO15 items of 
dress would fit A5 & A6. PW87 in fact admits that she did not ask A5 
and A6 to wear it nor was it verified from a tailor as to whether the 
dress recovered would fit A5 & A6. There is no statement made by 
A3 regarding the handing over of the weapons & dress, by A5 & A6 
to A3, which in any event would have to be proved independently. 
The identification of A5 & A6, of their dress at the time of recovery 
also is inadmissible. The mere recovery of dress under Section 27, 
that also through a confession statement of an alleged conspirator, 
does not implicate A5 or A6 who were alleged to be the assailants 
who killed the deceased. Pertinently the site or farm from which the 
recoveries were made was not proved to be owned by A1.
21.	 Insofar as the crime is concerned, the eye witness PW8 and the 
persons who reached the occurrence immediately thereafter, PW1 
and PW9, admittedly did not identify the accused. PW8 being a 
young boy of 15 at the time of incident, the Division Bench was of 
the opinion that it was quite natural that he was not able to identify 
the accused. It was also observed from his statement that, it was 
the police who informed him about A5 & A6 having committed the 
murder. As far as PW1 is concerned looking at the evidence of 
PW9, it has been found that PW1 had stated a deliberate falsehood 
before Court; which again, would not enable the Court to look at 
his Section 161 statement. PW9 also did not identify the accused 
and he spoke only of seeing one person running away. Obviously 
since no reliance could be placed on the evidence of PW8, PW1 & 
9, to pin the crime on A5 & A6, the Division Bench went on to look 
at the circumstances attempted to be established at the trial; being 
174
Supreme Court Reports
the motive, the conspiracy, the preparation, seizure of incriminating 
materials and the FSL report. Before leaving the eye-witnesses 
testimony, we cannot but notice that the prosecution never attempted 
to confront PW8 with the clothes recovered as MO12 to MO15, said 
to have been worn by A5 & A6, at the time when the crime was 
committed. Neither was it shown to PW9, who at least spoke of 
having seen one person running away from the scene.
22.	 On the question of motive, the Division Bench examined the evidence 
of PW4, the brother of A1, PW10, the wife of the deceased and 
PWs 6, wife of PW4, PW7, their son & PWs 11 to 13, relatives of A1 
& PW4, all of whom turned hostile. The employees in the institutions 
of PW4 & A1 also denied their former statements of enmity between 
the brothers and the alleged ill will of A1 against the deceased. 
PW4 denied the letter which was produced as MO40 before Court. 
However, the Division Bench has relied on MO40 and its contents 
on the ground that PW83 had stated that PW4 came to the Police 
Station and handed over the xerox copy of a 14-page letter. We 
are unable to accept the reasoning of the Division Bench especially 
since MO40 was confronted to PW4, when he was examined and 
he denied having written such a letter. The letter hence was not 
proved, though marked through the IO. Merely because PW83, the 
IO, submitted that it was handed over to him by PW4 at the time of 
investigation, that cannot be a reason to place reliance on MO40 
or to look into its contents to find enmity existing between A1 and 
PW4 and threats having been levelled against the deceased, by A1. 
23.	 The High Court further places reliance on PW10’s testimony or rather 
the statements made by her in the Section 161 statement on the 
reasoning that the wife will definitely be aware of the reasons behind 
the murder. She cannot be believed, if it is deposed that she is not 
aware of anything, was the finding. A statement made by PW10 that, 
she knew about A1 having insulted and levelled threats against the 
deceased; confronted to PW10 but denied, was relied upon, finding 
that it was affirmed by PW83. PW4 was also found to have resiled 
from his earlier statement under Section 161 because the sister of 
PW4 and A1 had filed a suit against them which was being jointly 
contested by them; a mere surmise to place heavy reliance on the 
Section 161 statements made by PW4. According to us the motive 
insofar as A1 having inimical feelings against the deceased, for having 
meddled in the affairs of the institutions and the division of assets, 
does not stand proved. PW4 only admitted to certain differences 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
175
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
between the brothers with reference to the running of a mess in 
the college and there was no reference to the deceased in so far 
as the specific dispute spoken of. We find absolutely no reason to 
find the motive established.
24.	 The next aspect dealt with by the High Court was on the conspiracy 
and preparation for the crime. Rightly reliance was placed on Mohd. 
Khalid v. State of W.B.7 wherein it was opined that conspiracies 
are not hatched in the open and when done in secrecy, it is very 
difficult for direct evidence to be produced relating to the conspiracy 
and the Court would have to fall back upon circumstantial evidence, 
which also has to be based on inferences made from the various 
circumstances proved from the acts and omissions of the accused. 
The Division Bench while referring to the various witnesses who 
were produced to prove the conspiracy first looked at the evidence 
of PW71, a Director of one of the institutions, also the wife of A1 
and PW72, who was an employee in the same institution. PW71 
though denied the various documents alleged to have been produced 
before Court, the Division Bench presumed that her testimony was 
a deliberate falsehood intended to save her husband. PW72 had 
produced the salary certificate of A2 issued by him in the capacity 
of in-charge Principal of the Dental College. The aforesaid evidence 
was relied on to find close acquaintance of A1 with A2 to A4, the 
former being the employer of the latter three persons. Insofar as the 
conspiracy hatched, the Court relied on the voluntary statements 
made by A3, A5 and A6 before PW87 and relied on Mehboob Ali v. 
State of Rajasthan8. The testimony of PW87 regarding the sites, 
where discussions were held and money changed hands, pointed 
out through the voluntary statements made by A1, was relied on by 
the Division Bench. In addition, Section 161 statements of PW61 to 
PW64 who had resiled from their statements in the testimony before 
Court regarding A3 having been seen with A5 and A6 in a hotel on 
28.04.2011, was also relied upon. As far as the preparation made, 
since the witnesses examined for proving the same also turned 
hostile, the evidence of the police officers were reckoned and the 
story as spoken of by the IOs were elaborately discussed, which in 
effect is based on the Section 161 Statements made by the various 
witnesses, before the police.
7	
(2002) 7 SCC 334
8	
(2016) 14 SCC 640
176
Supreme Court Reports
25.	 Section 162 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 was dealt with 
in Kali Ram v. State of H.P. 9 to hold that the provision makes it 
plain that ‘the statement made by any person to a police officer 
in the course of an investigation cannot be used for any purpose 
except for the purpose of contradicting a witness, as mentioned 
in the proviso to sub-section (1) or for the purposes mentioned 
in sub-section (2)’ (sic para-17). The said principle was reiterated 
with reference to Section 162 under the Criminal Procedure Code, 
1973 in R. Shaji v. State of Kerala10. It was held by this Court that 
‘statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. can be used only for the 
purpose of contradiction and statements under Section 164 Cr.P.C. 
can be used for both corroboration and contradiction’ (sic para-25). 
It was further held that though the object of the statement of witness 
recorded under Section 164 is two-fold, there is no proposition that 
if the statement of a witness is recorded under Section 164 before 
a Magistrate, the evidence of such witness in Court should be 
discarded. Rajendra Singh v. State of U.P. 11 was a case in which 
the High Court, as in the present case, relied upon the statements 
of six witnesses, recorded by the IO under Section 161 Cr.P.C., to 
enter a finding that the respondent could not have been present at 
the scene of crime, as he was present in the meeting of the Nagar 
Nigam at Allahabad. It was unequivocally held that ‘a statement 
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. is not a substantive piece of evidence. 
In view of the proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 162 Cr.P.C., the 
statement can be used only for the limited purpose of contradicting 
the maker thereof in the manner laid down in the said proviso’ (sic 
para-6). It was found that the High Court committed a manifest error 
of law in relying upon wholly inadmissible evidence in recording a 
finding on the alibi claimed by one of the accused. 
26.	 The statements made by the IOs regarding the motive, conspiracy 
and preparation comes out as the prosecution story, as discernible 
from the Section 161 statements of various witnesses who were 
questioned by the police during investigation; which statements 
are wholly inadmissible under Section 162 of the Cr.P.C. Merely 
because the IOs spoke of such statements having been made by 
9	
(1973) 2 SCC 808
10	
(2013) 14 SCC 266
11	
(2007) 7 SCC 378
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
177
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
the witnesses during investigation, does not give them any credibility, 
enabling acceptance, unless the witnesses themselves spoke of such 
motive or acts of commission or omission or instances from which 
conspiracy could be inferred as also the preparation, established 
beyond reasonable doubt. We are unable to find either the motive, 
the conspiracy or the preparation or even the crime itself to have 
been established in Court, at the trial through the witnesses examined 
before Court. The witnesses had turned hostile, for reasons best 
known to themselves. The only inference possible, on the witnesses 
turning hostile is that either they have been persuaded for reasons 
unknown or coerced into resiling from the statements made under 
Section 161 or that they had not made such statements before police 
officers. Merely because the story came out of the mouth of the IO, 
it cannot be believed and a legal sanctity given to it, higher than that 
provided to Section 161 statements under Section 162 of the Cr.P.C.
27.	 The High Court has also relied on voluntary statements made 
regarding the sites where discussions were held, and the money 
was transferred, by A1 itself, to further find the conspiracy relying 
on Mehboob Ali8. That was a case in which, pursuing the voluntary 
statements of the accused arrested, on the charge of dealing in 
counterfeit notes, the kingpin was arrested, from whose possession 
fake notes were recovered. In the present case but for the accused 
having pointed out the various places where allegedly discussions 
were held and money was transacted, there was no fact discovered 
from the site, or any recovery made of a concealed object which 
could lead to an inference of a culpable fact. 
28.	 Now we come to the seizures and recoveries relied on by the Court, 
again as spoken of by the Investigating Officer since the independent 
witnesses who attested the mahazars turned hostile. The significant 
recoveries made were of cash from the possession of A2 to A6, the 
clothes alleged to have been worn by A5 & A6 when the crime was 
committed, the weapons with which the crime was committed and 
the vehicles in which the getaway was carried out. As far as the 
vehicles are concerned even the eyewitnesses, either PW1 or PW9, 
who were at the crime scene immediately after the commission of 
the offence, did not speak of A5 & A6 having fled on a motor bike. 
The specific allegation of PW8, the eyewitness, in his FIS was that 
while himself and his father were strolling, at the scene of occurrence, 
suddenly two persons emerged from the bushes, hacked his father 
178
Supreme Court Reports
to death and ran away, obviously on foot. This was the statement 
made by both PW1 and PW9, the former of whom turned completely 
hostile, and the latter did not speak of any motor bike. The recovery 
of the motor bike hence is of no consequence. The pickup van is 
said to have been used for reaching the hide out, which is said to be 
a farm. There was no incriminating material found from the pickup 
van connecting this vehicle to the crime. 
29.	 Insofar as the clothes are concerned, we cannot but notice that the 
analysis report indicates that the recovered dress materials had blood 
stains on it which were analyzed to be human blood of ‘O’ group, 
and the post-mortem certificate indicates the deceased to be of ‘O+’ 
group. It is trite that this alone cannot implicate the accused since 
there should be a clear connection established of the recovered 
items with the accused and the crime. Especially in this case, where 
the clothes were not recovered on the confession statement of A5 
& A6, who are alleged to have committed the crime. The weapons, 
as were the clothes, were recovered on the confession statement of 
A3, from the farm. Though, the High Court went on to find that A5 
& A6 had handed over the clothes and the weapons to A3 to hide, 
this has to be proved by the prosecution and cannot be based on 
the so called voluntary statements made by the accused. A3, A5 & 
A6 were arrested on the same day and they were taken together, 
allegedly in pursuance of the confession statement made by A3. 
The identification said to have been made by A5 & A6 at the time 
of recovery, to the police officers, again is not a confession made 
under Section 27 and would be hit by Sections 25 and 26 of the 
Evidence Act.
30.	 Athappa Goundan, In re12, was relied on heavily in the impugned 
judgment by the Division Bench to bring in the confession under 
Section 27, to inculpate the accused other than those who confessed, 
under Section 30 of the Evidence Act. Therein the confession 
specifically spoke of the murder by the person in police custody and 
also offered to produce two bottles, a rope and a cloth gag, which 
was used to commit the murder. These objects were recovered on the 
same being pointed out by the accused. The Court opined that the 
objects produced, not being incriminating in nature, their production 
would be irrelevant unless they were connected with the murder; 
12	
1937 SCC OnLine Mad 76
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
179
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
when there was no evidence to connect the objects to the murder, 
apart from the confession. It was hence held that any information 
which served to connect the object discovered with the offence 
charged was admissible under Section 27. Pulukuri Kottaya5 held:
“Their Lordships are unable to accept this reasoning. The 
difficulty, however great, of proving that a fact discovered 
on information supplied by the accused is a relevant fact 
can afford no justification for reading into  Section 27 
something which is not there, and admitting in evidence a 
confession barred by Section 26. Except in cases in which 
the possession, or concealment, of an object constitutes 
the gist of the offence charged, it can seldom happen that 
information relating to the discovery of a fact forms the 
foundation of the prosecution case. It is only one link in 
the chain of proof, and the other links must be forged in 
manner allowed by law.”
(Paragraph 10)
31.	 Naresh Chandra Das v. King-Emperor13, in a dissenting judgment 
held that so much of the statements leading to the discovery of a fact 
is admissible, but still, for the fact discovered to be made relevant, 
the prosecution has to supply independent evidence and for this 
purpose the confessional statement cannot be utilised, since it 
would offend Section 25 and Section 26 of the Evidence Act. It was 
held that “If the prosecution cannot bring in any evidence aliunde, 
connecting the fact discovered with the offence, the prosecution 
may have to fall”. (sic)
32.	 Pulukuri Kottaya5 considering the impact of Section 27 held that the 
disclosure, under Section 27, is with reference to the concealment of 
some object and not the object itself, which object recovered must 
be connected to the crime to pin the guilt on the accused, who was 
instrumental in making the recovery by supplying the information of 
concealment. The confession under Section 27, if speaking of the 
crime itself, that portion is not admissible evidence, since it would 
offend Sections 25 and 26. We extract paragraph 9 which dealt with 
the effect and impact of Section 27:
13	
1941 SCC OnLine Cal 178
180
Supreme Court Reports
“Section 27, which is not artistically worded, provides an 
exception to the prohibition imposed by the preceding 
section, and enables certain statements made by a person 
in police custody to be proved. The condition necessary 
to bring the section into operation is that the discovery 
of a fact in consequence of information received from a 
person accused of any offence in the custody of a Police 
officer must be deposed to, and thereupon so much of 
the information as relates distinctly to the fact thereby 
discovered may be proved. The section seems to be 
based on the view that if a fact is actually discovered 
in consequence of information given, some guarantee 
is afforded thereby that the information was true, and 
accordingly can be safely allowed to be given in evidence; 
but clearly the extent of the information admissible must 
depend on the exact nature of the fact discovered to which 
such information is required to relate. Normally the section 
is brought into operation when a person in police custody 
produces from some place of concealment some object, 
such as a dead body, a weapon, or ornaments, said to 
be connected with the crime of which the informant is 
accused. Mr. Megaw, for the Crown, has argued that in 
such a case the “fact discovered” is the physical object 
produced, and that any information which relates distinctly 
to that object can be proved. Upon this view information 
given by a person that the body produced is that of a 
person murdered by him, that the weapon produced is the 
one used by him in the commission of a murder, or that 
the ornaments produced were stolen in a dacoity would 
all be admissible. If this be the effect of Section 27, little 
substance would remain in the ban imposed by the two 
preceding sections on confessions made to the police, or 
by persons in police custody. That ban was presumably 
inspired by the fear of the legislature that a person under 
police influence might be induced to confess by the exercise 
of undue pressure. But if all that is required to lift the ban 
be the inclusion in the confession of information relating 
to an object subsequently produced, it seems reasonable 
to suppose that the persuasive powers of the police will 
prove equal to the occasion, and that in practice the ban 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
181
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
will lose its effect. On normal principles of construction their 
Lordships think that the proviso to Section 26, added by 
Section 27, should not be held to nullify the substance of 
the section. In their Lordships’ view it is fallacious to treat 
the “fact discovered” within the section as equivalent to the 
object produced; the fact discovered embraces the place 
from which the object is produced and the knowledge of 
the accused as to this, and the information given must 
relate distinctly to this fact. Information as to past user, 
or the past history, of the object produced is not related 
to its discovery in the setting in which it is discovered. 
Information supplied by a person in custody that “I will 
produce a knife concealed in the roof of my house” does 
not lead to the discovery of a knife; knives were discovered 
many years ago. It leads to the discovery of the fact that 
a knife is concealed in the house of the informant to his 
knowledge; and if the knife is proved to have been used 
in the commission of the offence, the fact discovered is 
very relevant. But if to the statement the words be added 
“with which I stabbed A”, these words are inadmissible 
since they do not relate to the discovery of the knife in 
the house of the informant.”
(underlined by us for emphasis)
33.	 State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu14 traced the history of case 
law and described Pulukuri Kottaya5 as a locus classicus which set 
at rest much of the controversy centring around the interpretation 
of Section 27. The first requirement, according to the learned 
Judges was that the IO should depose that he discovered a fact in 
consequence of the information received from an accused person 
in police custody, which fact was not in the knowledge of the police 
officer. The information or disclosure should necessarily be free from 
any element of compulsion and only so much of the information 
as relating distinctly to the fact thereby discovered can be proved 
and nothing more. The Section explicitly clarifies that confession 
is not taboo, but the confessional part which is admissible is only 
such information or part of it, which relates distinctly to the facts 
14	
(2005) 11 SCC 600
182
Supreme Court Reports
discovered, by means of the information furnished. The rationale 
behind the provision was held to be that, if a fact is discovered in 
consequence of the information supplied, it offers some guarantee 
that the information is true and can therefore, be safely allowed to 
be admitted in evidence as an incriminating circumstance against 
the accused.
34.	 In H.P. Admn. v. Om Prakash15, there was a recovery made of a 
dagger from under a stone, on the concealment being informed to 
the police and the accused also pointed out the person from whom 
he had purchased the dagger. While the former statement was 
admissible under Section 27, the latter was held to be inadmissible. 
The concealment of a knife, which the police were not aware of, 
when discovered by the information supplied, then the information 
of concealment is reliable. However, if the person from whom the 
knife is purchased is pointed out, it cannot be said to be discovered, 
if nothing is found or recovered from him, as a consequence of the 
information furnished by the accused. 
35.	 The State in its written submission has relied on State of Maharashtra v. 
Damu16, Rumi Bora Dutta v. State of Assam17, Raja v. State of 
Haryana18, to buttress its contention regarding the admissibility of 
the disclosure statements. In Damu16, the dead body was recovered 
from a site, to which site, it was carried by the 2nd & 3rd accused, 
in the former’s motorcycle and thrown in the canal. Since the dead 
body was recovered prior to the disclosure made, the statement 
was found to be inadmissible under Section 27. But a broken piece 
of glass was recovered from the spot, pointed out by A3, which 
correctly fitted into the broken tail lamp of the motorcycle recovered 
from the house of A2. This provided credence to the confession 
statement of the accused, despite the dead body having been 
recovered, antecedent to the information. Navjot Sandhu14 (supra), 
affirmed Om Prakash15 and Damu16 and held that “discovery of a 
fact would not comprehend a pure and simple mental fact or state 
of mind relating to a physical object, dissociated from the recovery 
of a physical object.” (sic)
15	
(1972) 1 SCC 249
16	
(2000) 6 SCC 269
17	
(2013) 7 SCC 417
18	
(2015) 11 SCC 43
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
183
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
36.	 In this context, we must notice Pandurang Kalu Patil v. State of 
Maharashtra19, wherein Pulukuri Kottaya5 was followed and it was 
reiterated that the fact discovered is not equivalent to the object 
produced. The information regarding concealing of the article of the 
crime, it was held, does not lead to discovery of the article but this 
leads to the discovery of the fact that the article was concealed at 
the indicated place, within the knowledge of the accused.
37.	 In Rumi Bora Dutta v. State of Assam17, the confession of the 
accused led to the discovery of a knife and skipping rope and the 
medical evidence corroborated the fact that the deceased died 
because of strangulation and there was also a stab injury on his 
chest. The weapons concealed by the accused and recovered on 
their information had a direct nexus with the injuries found in the 
post-mortem report. In Raja v. State of Haryana18, there was a 
recovery of knife and blood-stained clothes and ashes of a burnt 
blanket. The blood-stained clothes and the weapons were sent to the 
FSL, whose report clearly indicated blood stains on the clothes and 
the knife, despite absence of matching of the blood group. Relying 
on John Pandian v. State20, it was held that the accused has not 
offered any explanation as to how the human blood was found on 
the clothes and the knife, which was an incriminating circumstance.
38.	 With the above principles in mind when we look at the recoveries 
made, even if the testimonies of the IOs are believed, that there was 
an unexplained stash of money recovered from the person and the 
residential accommodations of A2 to A6, they were not recoveries 
under Section 27. The recovery was akin to a seizure, not one made 
on the information supplied or confession recorded. Further, there 
is nothing connecting the cash with the crime. As we held, even the 
Mahazar did not carry out a proper inventory, of the cash recovered 
and the identification made in Court, was of the bundles in which 
the cash was seized. A question arises as to how the accused came 
in possession of such huge amounts of cash, which if found to be 
beyond their means and sources of income, proceedings will have 
to be initiated elsewhere and unless there is a connection clearly 
19	
(2002) 2 SCC 490
20	
(2010) 14 SCC 129
184
Supreme Court Reports
established of the money having been transacted, in furtherance 
of the conspiracy, which is totally lacking in the above case, the 
recovery cannot aid the prosecution. 
39.	 The clothes and machetes allegedly, worn by A5 & A6 and used 
by them to commit the crime, were recovered on the confession 
statement of A3, the alleged conspirator. True, there were blood 
stains on the clothes and the machetes, which were found to be of 
‘O’ group, matching the blood group of the accused as found from the 
post-mortem report. A3, we have pertinently observed is not alleged 
to have committed the crime proper, i.e. the hacking of the deceased 
victim. There is also no independent evidence to prove that A5 & A6 
handed over the clothes and the machetes to A3. The confession 
statement of A3 that the clothes and machetes were handed over 
to him by A5 & A6 is the history, which has to be cogently proved 
by evidence aliunde. The fact discovered is the concealment of the 
clothes and the machetes, by A3, which fact of concealment has to 
be connected to the actual crime. In the present case neither are the 
clothes or machetes connected to A5 & A6 who are alleged to have 
committed the crime nor is A3, an alleged conspirator even accused 
of having been involved in the crime proper, that is the murder of 
the deceased. Further, it was not even verified whether the clothes 
recovered fit A5 & A6, in which context they owe no explanation 
insofar as the blood found on the clothes. Confessions allegedly 
made by A1 regarding the sites where the conspiracy was hatched 
and the money transacted does not lead to any discovery of fact. 
The narration about the conspiracy and the money transactions are 
not admissible and the mere pointing out of two sites does not lead 
to any discovery of fact, when the narration is eschewed.
40.	 The High Court has laboured on Section 30 of the Evidence Act to 
hold that the confession of a co-accused can be used against the other 
accused. It was held, Section 30 would bring within its ambit even a 
Section 27 confession in addition to an extra-judicial confession or 
one made under Section 164 of the Cr.P.C.; the last two of which is 
totally absent in the present case. In so far as Section 30 is concerned 
Kashmira Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh21, held so : 
21	
(1952) 1 SCC 275
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
185
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
“The proper way to approach a case of this kind is, first, to 
marshal the evidence against the accused excluding the 
confession altogether from consideration and see whether, 
if it is believed, a conviction could safely be based on it. 
If it is capable of belief independently of the confession, 
then of course it is not necessary to call the confession in 
aid. But cases may arise where the Judge is not prepared 
to act on the other evidence as it stands even though, if 
believed, it would be sufficient to sustain a conviction. In 
such an event, the Judge may call in aid the confession 
and use it to lend assurance to the other evidence and 
thus fortify himself in believing what without the aid of the 
confession he would not be prepared to accept.”
41.	 A Constitution Bench in Haricharan Kurmi vs. State of Bihar22, 
held that a confession as mentioned in Section 30 is not evidence 
under Section 3 of the Evidence Act. We extract from paragraph 13 
of the said decision: 
“… The result, therefore, is that in dealing with a case 
against an accused person, the court cannot start with 
the confession of a co-accused person; it must begin with 
other evidence adduced by the prosecution and after it 
has formed its opinion with regard to the quality and effect 
of the said evidence, then it is permissible to turn to the 
confession in order to receive assurance to the conclusion 
of guilt which the judicial mind is about to reach on the 
said other evidence. That, briefly stated, is the effect of 
the provisions contained in Section 30. The same view 
has been expressed by this Court in Kashmira Singh v. 
State of Madhya Pradesh(1952) 1 SCC 275 where the decision 
of the Privy Council in Bhuboni Sahu Case has been cited 
with approval.”
42.	 Athappa Goundan’s 12 case was held to be wrongly decided, by the 
Privy Council in Pulukuri Kottaya5. When even the recovery made 
based on a confession under Section 27, by itself cannot inculpate 
the person who made such a confession, if there is no independent 
22	
(1964) 6 SCR 623
186
Supreme Court Reports
evidence otherwise connecting the fact discovered to the crime, there 
is no question of such a confession being made use of, to inculpate 
the other accused under Section 30 of the Evidence Act.
43.	 Before leaving the impact and effect of Section 27 and Section 30, 
we cannot but reiterate the caution expressed in Pandurang Kalu 
Patil19 wherein was impugned a judgment of a Division Bench of the 
High Court of Bombay which disagreed with the ratio in Pulukuri 
Kottaya5. In that context this Court referred to the judgment in 
State v. Chhaganlal Gangaram Lavar23 and an extract was made 
from page 6 paragraph 10 which is as below:
“So long as the Supreme Court does not take a different 
view from the view taken by the Privy Council, the decisions 
of the Privy Council are still binding upon us, and when 
we say that the decisions of the Privy Council are binding 
upon us, what is binding is not merely the point actually 
decided but an opinion expressed by the Privy Council, 
which opinion is expressed after careful consideration of 
all the arguments and which is deliberately and advisedly 
given.”
44.	 It was held that Pulukuri Kottaya5 was considered and tested by 
this Court time and again and on all such occasions, its ratio was 
re-affirmed, lately, as we noticed in Navjot Sandhu14. The attention 
of the Division Bench of the High Court of Karnataka obviously was 
not drawn to the decision in Pulukuri Kottaya5 , of the Privy Council, 
affirmed and reaffirmed by the Supreme Court of India, in which, the 
Full Bench decision of the Madras High Court in Athappa Goundan12, 
relied on in the impugned judgment, had been overruled. 
45.	 In the present case, we have already held that the confession under 
Section 27 cannot be relied upon and there is no question of any 
aid being drawn from it to implicate the other accused. As far as the 
sites pointed out by A1, we have found that it did not lead to any 
discovery of a fact and it is hit by Section 25 & 26 of the Evidence Act.
46.	 We cannot but observe that the judgment of the High Court reversing 
the order of acquittal of the Trial Court proceeds on mere surmises 
23	
1954 SCC OnLine Bom 69
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
187
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
and conjectures relying wholly on the testimony of the Investigating 
Officers, who merely regurgitated the statements recorded under 
Section 161 and the voluntary statements of the accused. As has 
been rightly pointed out in Ramesh v. State of Haryana24 when 
the statements recorded under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure is resiled from, there arises a possibility that the police 
coerced such statements, but considering the huge prevalence of 
such instances, as in the present case, of the entire witnesses turning 
hostile, there could be various other factors also. It could be for fear 
of deposing against the accused, political pressure, pressure from 
family or society and even instances of monetary consideration. We 
do not think that the High Court could have relied on the decision 
to hold that the reason for the enblock hostility of witnesses at trial, 
could only be due to the influence wielded by the accused who 
had even persuaded the wife of the deceased to turn hostile; which 
reasoning is presumptuous and fallacious. 
47.	 We quite understand the consternation of the learned Judges, in 
the cold-blooded murder of a person, carried out in front of his own 
son where the investigation though elaborate, it collapsed miserably 
at the trial, where the prosecution witnesses; all of them, turned 
hostile. We share the consternation of the learned Judges but that 
is no reason for us to rely on Section 161 statements or the story 
scripted by the investigating agency based on the so called voluntary 
statements and the recoveries made, which the prosecution failed to 
prove to have a nexus with the crime. We also notice that there was 
a test identification parade carried out, in which also PW1, PW8 and 
PW9 failed to identify the assailants. We make this observation fully 
conscious of the principle that a TIP is only to aid the investigation 
but keeping in mind the fact that it could always lend support to an 
identification made in Court, which unfortunately in the present case 
was not made either in Court or at the stage of investigation. We 
find absolutely no reason to sustain the conviction entered by the 
High Court, reversing the order of acquittal. 
48.	 Though Chandrappa1 was specifically noticed by the High Court, 
the principles were not rightly appreciated, while setting aside the 
24	
(2017) 1 SCC 529
188
Supreme Court Reports
order of acquittal. It has been emphasized that when there are two 
reasonable views possible from the evidence led, the one favouring 
the accused should be adopted, especially since the presumption 
of innocence of the accused until proved guilty, a fundamental tenet 
of criminal jurisprudence, stands further strengthened by the order 
of acquittal. In the present case, we are afraid that there are not 
even two views coming forth from the evidence. The only view that 
comes forth is that the prosecution completely failed to prove the 
allegations raised and charged against each of the accused, more by 
reason of all the witnesses paraded before Court, at the trial, having 
turned hostile for reasons unknown. Whatever be the reason behind 
such hostility, it cannot result in a conviction, based on the testimony 
of the Investigating Officers which is founded only on Section 161 
statements and voluntary statements of accused; the former violative 
of Section 162 of the Cr.P.C and the latter in breach of Sections 25 
& 26 of the Evidence Act. 
49.	 We cannot but say that the High Court has egregiously erred in 
convicting the accused on the evidence led and has jumped into 
presumptions and assumptions based on the story scripted by the 
prosecution without any legal evidence being available. Truth is always 
a chimera and the illusion surrounding it can only be removed by 
valid evidence led, either direct or indirect, and in the event of it being 
circumstantial, providing a chain of circumstances with connecting 
links leading to the conclusion of the guilt of the accused and only 
the guilt of the accused, without leaving any reasonable doubt for 
any hypothesis of innocence. We can only accede to and share the 
consternation of the Division Bench of the High Court, which borders 
on desperation, due to the futility of the entire exercise. That is an 
occupational hazard, every judge should learn to live with, which 
cannot be a motivation to tread the path of righteousness and convict 
those accused somehow, even when there is a total absence of legal 
evidence; to enter into a purely moral conviction, total anathema to 
criminal jurisprudence. With a heavy heart for the unsolved crime, 
but with absolutely no misgivings on the issue of lack of evidence, 
against the accused arrayed, we acquit the accused reversing the 
judgment of the High Court and restoring that of the Trial Court.
50.	 Criminal Appeals are allowed.
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
189
Renuka Prasad v. 
The State Represented by Assistant Superintendent of Police
51.	 The accused shall be released forthwith, if in custody and not required 
in any other case and if already released on bail, their bail bonds 
shall stand cancelled.
52.	 Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey