[2025] 3 S.C.R. 432 : 2025 INSC 322
Patel Babubhai Manohardas & Ors. 
v. 
State of Gujarat
(Criminal Appeal No. 1388 of 2014)
05 March 2025
[Abhay S. Oka and Ujjal Bhuyan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The four appellants were convicted by the Trial Court u/ss.306 and 
114 of Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment 
for 5 years. The High Court affirmed the conviction and sentence. 
Whether the High Court was justified in affirming the conviction 
and sentence.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.306 and 114 – Victim-deceased died by 
consuming poison – It was alleged that one cleaning worker 
in his office had trapped him in a love scandal – A note was 
found from the pocket of deceased stating that the said 
cleaning worker and her family members were blackmailing 
victim after taking various photographs and videos of him 
in compromising position – FIR was lodged – Trial Court 
convicted the four appellants u/ss.306 and 114 of Penal Code, 
1860 – The conviction was confirmed by the High Court – 
Correctness:
Held: On perusal of evidence of record, it would reveal that the 
incident had occurred on 25.04.2009 and the complaint was filed 
14.05.2009 – There is an unexplained delay of 20 days in lodging 
the FIR – There are significant inconsistencies in the evidence of 
the prosecution witnesses regarding the occurrence – PW-2 stated 
in her substantive evidence that when she reached her house 
she saw dead body of her husband (deceased) – However, in 
her cross-examination, she stated that when she reached home 
relatives had already taken her husband to hospital – When 
the panchnama was drawn on 25.04.2009, no note was found 
* Author
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
433
Patel Babubhai Manohardas & Ors. v. State of Gujarat
on the body of the deceased – PW-2 stated that from the time 
of death till the lodging of complaint, the suicide note was with 
PW-7 – This cast serious aspersions about the credibility of the 
suicide note – PW-6 stated that his niece told him about his 
brother-deceased, then he went to the house of deceased and 
at that time PW-7 was also present there – On the other hand, 
PW-7 stated that his brother PW-6 came to his house and told 
him about deceased and thereafter he rushed to deceased’s 
house – Such inconsistencies clearly impeach the credibility 
of the prosecution witnesses – Nothing is placed on record to 
show recovery of any jewellery (ornaments) by the police from 
the accused persons – No signed cheques of the deceased 
or cheque book or passbook of the deceased were recovered 
and exhibited in court – Therefore, the very sub-stratum of the 
prosecution case that the accused persons were making illegal 
gain by blackmailing the deceased falls flat – Further, there is no 
recovery of any trace of the poison consumed by the deceased at 
the place of occurrence – Also, the prosecution did not examine 
the Deputy Chief Handwriting Expert as an expert witness  – 
The records also do not indicate that the accused had admitted 
genuineness of the report of the handwriting expert – Finally, even 
if the suicide note is taken as correct and genuine, there is no act 
of incitement on the part of the appellants proximate to the date 
on which the deceased committed suicide – No act is attributed 
to the appellants proximate to the time of suicide which was of 
such a nature that the deceased was left with no alternative but 
to commit suicide – In such circumstances, it cannot be said that 
any offence of abetment to commit suicide is made out against 
the appellants – Consequently, the impugned judgment and order 
of the High Court and of the trial court are hereby set aside.  
[Paras 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 41, 45, 46]
Evidence – Handwriting Expert – Opinion of handwriting 
expert – Discussed. [Paras 42-44]
Case Law Cited
Ramesh Kumar v. State of Chhattisgarh [2001] Supp. 4 SCR 
247 : (2001) 9 SCC 618; Chitresh Kumar Chopra v. State (Govt. 
of NCT of Delhi) [2009] 13 SCR 230 : (2009) 16 SCC 605; 
Amalendu Pal alias Jhantu v. State of West Bengal [2009] 15 
434
SCR 836 : (2010) 1 SCC 707; Ude Singh v. State of Haryana 
[2019] 9 SCR 703 : (2019) 17 SCC 301; Rajesh v. State of 
Haryana (2020) 15 SCC 359; Amudha v. State, 2024 INSC 244; 
Kamaruddin Dastagir Sanadi v. State of Karnataka (2024) SCC 
Online SC 3541; Prakash v. State of Maharashtra, 2024 INSC 
1020; Sanju @ Sanjay Singh Sengar v. State of M.P. [2002] 3 
SCR 668 : (2002) 5 SCC 371; Kumar @ Shiva Kumar v. State 
of Karnataka [2024] 3 SCR 329 : 2024 INSC 156; Shashi Kumar 
Banerjee v. Subodh Kumar Banerjee (since deceased) AIR 1964 
SC 529; Murari Lal v. State of M.P. [1980] 2 SCR 249 : (1980) 1 
SCC 704; Keshav Dutt v. State of Haryana [2010] 10 SCR 151 : 
(2010) 9 SCC 286 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
List of Keywords
Abetment to suicide; Abets; Instigation; Section 306 IPC; Positive 
action proximate to the time of occurrence; Mens rea; Inconsistent 
testimony; Veracity of the evidence; Credibility of witness; Suicide 
Note; Panchnama; Delay in lodging FIR; Expert Evidence; 
Handwriting Expert; Consumption of poison; Handwriting is opinion 
evidence.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1388 of 2014
From the Judgment and Order dated 17.12.2013 of the High Court 
of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in CRLA No. 626 of 2011
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Rajiv Kumar, Sanjeev Gupta, Bhanu Kapoor, J.K. Mishra, 
Rameshwar Prasad Goyal.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Ms. Deepanwita Priyanka, Ms. Swati Ghildiyal, Ms. Devyani Bhatt.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
435
Patel Babubhai Manohardas & Ors. v. State of Gujarat
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Ujjal Bhuyan, J.
This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and 
order dated 17.12.2013 passed by the High Court of Gujarat at 
Ahmedabad (briefly ‘the High Court’ hereinafter) in Criminal Appeal 
No. 626 of 2011.
2.	
It may be mentioned that the four appellants are accused Nos. 1 to 4. 
They were convicted by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, 
Mehsana vide the judgment and order dated 12.05.2011 in Special 
Atrocity Case No. 53/2009 under Sections 306 and 114 of Indian 
Penal Code, 1860 (‘IPC’ for short) and sentenced to rigorous 
imprisonment (RI) for 5 years and to pay a fine of Rs. 10,000.00 
each with a default stipulation.
3.	
Aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, appellants 
preferred Criminal Appeal No. 626 of 2011 before the High Court. 
State of Gujarat also filed Criminal Appeal No. 796 of 2011 for 
enhancement of sentence. By the common judgment and order dated 
17.12.2013, the High Court dismissed the appeal of the appellants 
and affirmed the conviction and sentence imposed on the appellants 
by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Mehsana (‘trial court’ for 
short). The appeal filed by the State was also dismissed.
4.	
It is against the aforesaid judgment and order dated 17.12.2013 
passed by the High Court that the appellants preferred the related 
SLP (Crl.) No. 2809/2014. However, State did not challenge before 
this Court dismissal of its appeal by the High Court.
5.	
This Court by order dated 07.04.2014 had issued notice both on 
the special leave petition as well as on the prayer for bail. By order 
dated 04.07.2014, leave was granted. Thereafter, vide the order 
dated 17.10.2014, this Court granted bail to appellant No. 4. Vide 
the order dated 11.05.2015, appellant No. 1 was also granted bail. 
Thereafter, by the order dated 14.09.2015, appellant Nos. 2 and 3 
were granted bail.
6.	
Prosecution case in brief is that one Jaybalaben lodged first 
information before the Mehsana Taluka police station on 14.05.2009 
436
stating that at 08:00 AM on 25.04.2009, she and her daughter Priyanka 
had gone to the Amipura water park dispensary as she was working 
there. At around 01:00 PM, one Jayantibhai Kalidas, a neighbour, 
came to her dispensary and told her that her mother-in-law was ill. 
On hearing this, she and her daughter came back home immediately 
in a rickshaw. When she reached her house, she saw many people 
had gathered there. She went inside the house and saw her husband 
Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai lying on a cot with his younger and elder 
brothers standing nearby. Though she tried to revive him, he did not 
respond; he had already died. As she started weeping, the ladies who 
were present there told her that her husband had consumed poison. 
Foul smell of poison was coming from his mouth. First informant 
stated that her husband was taken to the village dispensary where 
he was declared dead. Thereafter police came. After completion of 
necessary paper works, body of her husband was taken to Mehsana 
Civil Hospital for postmortem examination on completion of which 
the body was handed over to the family.
6.1.	
Jaybalaben continued with her narration. She stated that 
about a year ago, a case of misappropriation was registered 
against her husband Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai in his office. 
She and her elder brother-in-law Jayantibhai had asked her 
husband as to why he needed so much of money to which 
the reply of her husband was that one cleaning worker in 
his office by the name Geetaben had trapped him in a love 
scandal and thereafter started blackmailing him for money. It 
was for this reason that he had to withdraw money from the 
office to give her.
6.2.	
When her elder brother-in-law Jayantibhai called Geetaben, her 
mother Jasiben, her husband Dahyabhai and relative Babubhai 
Patel to return the money, they initially agreed to do so but 
did not return. They also took away ornaments (jewellery).
6.3.	
Jaybalaben also stated that at the time of death of her husband, 
they found one note of two pages from the pocket of her 
husband’s trouser which was shown to her by Jayantibhai, 
her elder brother-in-law. She stated that from that note, it 
was apparent that Geetaben and her family members were 
blackmailing her husband after taking various photographs 
and videos of him with her in compromising position. She 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
437
Patel Babubhai Manohardas & Ors. v. State of Gujarat
stated that her husband had also stolen ornaments (jewellery) 
of her daughter and gave those to Geetaben and her family 
members. It was for this reason that her husband Dashrathbhai 
Karsanbhai had consumed poison.
7.	
The aforesaid complaint was registered as I.C.R. No. 107/2009 
by the Mehsana Taluka police station under Sections 306/114 of 
IPC read with Section 3(2)(5) of The Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (‘the Prevention 
of Atrocities Act’ hereinafter). The investigating officer on conclusion 
of investigation filed chargesheet against the appellants before the 
Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mehsana. As the case was triable 
by the Court of Sessions, it was committed to the Court of Additional 
Sessions Judge, Mehsana (trial court) where the case was numbered 
as Special Atrocities Case No. 53/2009. Prosecution examined as 
many as 14 witnesses and exhibited a number of documents to prove 
its case. On completion of prosecution evidence, statements of the 
appellants were recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C.). Appellants denied the prosecution case 
and alleged false implication.
8.	
On consideration of the oral as well as documentary evidence and 
after hearing the parties, trial court vide the judgment and order 
dated 12.05.2011 convicted the appellants under Sections 306/114 
of IPC but acquitted them of the charge under Section 3(2)(5) of 
the Prevention of Atrocities Act. Upon such conviction, the trial court 
sentenced the appellants to undergo RI for 5 years and to pay fine 
of Rs. 10,000.00 each with a default stipulation for the offence 
punishable under Sections 306/114 IPC.
9.	
Appellants assailed the aforesaid conviction and sentence of the trial 
court before the High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 626 of 2011. As 
pointed out above, State also filed Criminal Appeal No. 796/2011 
for enhancement of sentence.
10.	 High Court vide the judgment and order dated 17.12.2013 upheld 
the conviction and sentence of the appellants and dismissed their 
appeal. High Court also did not find any good ground to enhance 
the sentence. Consequently, the criminal appeal filed by the State 
was dismissed.
11.	 Learned counsel for the appellants submits that both the trial court 
and the High Court failed to appreciate that the prosecution case 
438
was not supported by any material evidence, such as, video cassette 
and objectionable photographs of the deceased with the accused 
persons etc. Therefore, the story of blackmailing by the accused 
persons compelling the deceased to commit suicide is not at all 
believable.
11.1.	 From the evidence tendered by the prosecution witnesses, no 
intention on the part of the accused persons to aid or instigate or 
abet the deceased to commit suicide is discernible. Appellants 
were neither present at the time and place of recovery of the 
dead body nor at any proximate point of time. Therefore, no 
case for abetment to commit suicide can be said to have been 
made out against the appellants.
11.2.	 Learned counsel for the appellants further submits that the 
so-called suicide note was produced before the police 20 days 
after the death of the deceased. As such, no reliance can be 
placed on such suicide note. 
11.3.	 Learned counsel further submits that both the courts below 
failed to appreciate that PW-7 Jayantibhai Karshanbhai Parmar, 
elder brother of the deceased, did not support the case of the 
prosecution. As such the charge under Section 306 IPC cannot 
be said to have been proved by the prosecution against the 
appellants beyond all reasonable doubt.
11.4.	 He also points out that according to the prosecution case, the 
deceased had given money and ornaments to the appellants on 
their blackmailing him. But there was neither recovery of any 
money nor ornaments from the accused persons (appellants). 
Learned counsel for the appellants submits that there could 
be various other reasons which compelled the deceased 
to take the extreme step, such as, disciplinary proceeding 
initiated in his office against him for misappropriation of money 
leading to his suspension but certainly no case of abetment 
to commit suicide can be said to have been made out against 
the appellants.
11.5.	 That being the position, learned counsel contends that 
appellants have been wrongly convicted under Sections 
306/114 IPC and, therefore, are entitled to a clear acquittal. 
Appeal should accordingly be allowed.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
439
Patel Babubhai Manohardas & Ors. v. State of Gujarat
12.	 Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent submits that death 
of Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai Parmar had taken place due to 
consumption of poison. This has been proved by the postmortem 
report. He submits that the suicide note (Ex. 33) was written in the 
own handwriting of the deceased and this has been proved as per 
the opinion of the handwriting expert. From the suicide note, it is 
apparent that appellants had extracted money from the deceased by 
blackmailing him with compromising photographs of the deceased 
with appellant No. 3. As the deceased became unable to withstand 
the same, he took the drastic step.
12.1.	 Learned counsel for the respondent submits that on a conjoint 
reading of all the oral and documentary evidence, it is evident 
that prosecution had proved the charge against the appellants 
beyond all reasonable doubt. Therefore, the trial court rightly 
convicted the appellants under the aforesaid provisions of law 
which conviction has been affirmed by the High Court. He, 
therefore, submits that there is no merit in this appeal and 
consequently the appeal should be dismissed.
13.	 Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties have received 
the due consideration of the Court.
14.	 Before we proceed to advert to the evidence of the material 
prosecution witnesses and to analyse the same, it would be apposite 
to refer to the legal provisions and the judicial precedents relevant 
for adjudication of the present criminal appeal.
15.	 Attempt to commit suicide is an offence in India. Section 309 IPC 
says that whoever attempts to commit suicide and does any act 
towards such act, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both. However, 
once suicide is carried out, the offence is complete. Considering the 
nature of the offence, obviously such a person would be beyond 
the reach of the law. Therefore, question of penalising him would 
not arise but whoever abets the commission of such suicide would 
be penalised under Section 306 IPC. Punishment prescribed under 
Section 306 IPC is imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to 10 years and shall also be liable to fine. What 
Section 306 IPC says is that if any person commits suicide, then 
whoever abets the commission of such suicide shall be punished 
as above.
440
16.	 Therefore, the crucial word in Section 306 IPC is ‘abets’. ‘Abetment’ 
is defined in Section 107 of IPC. As per Section 107 IPC, a person 
would be abetting the doing of a thing if he instigates any person 
to do that thing or if he encourages with one or more person or 
persons in any conspiracy for doing that thing or if he intentionally 
aids by any act or illegal omission doing of that thing. There are two 
explanations to Section 107. As per Explanation 1, even if a person 
by way of wilful misrepresentation or concealment of a material 
fact which he is otherwise bound to disclose voluntarily causes or 
procures or attempts to cause or procure a thing to be done, is 
said to instigate the doing of that thing. Explanation 2 clarifies that 
whoever does anything in order to facilitate the commission of an 
act, either prior to or at the time of commission of the act, is said to 
aid the doing of that act.
17.	 Section 114 IPC is an explanation or clarification of Section 107 IPC. 
What Section 114 IPC says is that whenever any person is absent 
but was present when the act or offence for which he would be 
punishable in consequence of the abetment is committed, he shall 
be deemed to have committed such an act or offence and would be 
liable to be punished as an abettor.
18.	 In Ramesh Kumar v. State of Chhattisgarh,1 this Court held that to 
‘instigate’ means to goad, urge, provoke, incite or encourage to do 
‘an act’. To satisfy the requirement of ‘instigation’, it is not necessary 
that actual words must be used to that effect or that the words or act 
should necessarily and specifically be suggestive of the consequence. 
Where the accused by his act or omission or by his continued course 
of conduct creates a situation that the deceased is left with no other 
option except to commit suicide, then ‘instigation’ may be inferred. 
A word uttered in a fit of anger or emotion without intending the 
consequences to actually follow cannot be said to be ‘instigation’. 
19.	 Elaborating further, this Court in Chitresh Kumar Chopra versus State 
(Govt. of NCT of Delhi)2 observed that to constitute ‘instigation’, a 
person who instigates another has to provoke, incite, urge or encourage 
the doing of an act by the other by ‘goading’ or ‘urging forward’. This 
Court summed up the constituents of ‘abetment’ as under:
1	
(2001) 9 SCC 618
2	
(2009) 16 SCC 605
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
441
Patel Babubhai Manohardas & Ors. v. State of Gujarat
(i) the accused kept on irritating or annoying the deceased 
by words, deeds or wilful omission or conduct which may 
even be a wilful silence until the deceased reacted or 
pushed or forced the deceased by his deeds, words or 
wilful omission or conduct to make the deceased move 
forward more quickly in a forward direction; and
(ii) that the accused had the intention to provoke, urge or 
encourage the deceased to commit suicide while acting in 
the manner noted above. Undoubtedly, presence of mens 
rea is the necessary concomitant of instigation.
20.	 Amalendu Pal alias Jhantu versus State of West Bengal3 is a case 
where this Court held that in a case of alleged abetment of suicide, 
there must be proof of direct or indirect act(s) of incitement to the 
commission of suicide. Merely on the allegation of harassment without 
there being any positive action proximate to the time of occurrence 
on the part of the accused which led or compelled the deceased to 
commit suicide, conviction in terms of Section 306 IPC would not 
be sustainable. Similar view has been expressed by this Court in 
case of Ude Singh versus State of Haryana.4
21.	 After considering the provisions of Sections 306 and 107 of IPC, this 
Court in Rajesh versus State of Haryana5 held that conviction under 
Section 306 IPC is not sustainable on the allegation of harassment 
without there being any positive action proximate to the time of 
occurrence on the part of the accused which led or compelled the 
person to commit suicide.
22.	 Abetment to commit suicide involves a mental process of instigating a 
person or intentionally aiding a person in the doing of a thing. Without 
a positive proximate act on the part of the accused to instigate or 
aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be sustained. Besides, 
in order to convict a person under Section 306 IPC, there has to be 
a clear mens rea to commit the offence.
23.	 This Court in Amudha versus State6 held that there has to be an 
act of incitement on the part of the accused proximate to the date 
3	
(2010) 1 SCC 707
4	
(2019) 17 SCC 301
5	
(2020) 15 SCC 359
6	
2024 INSC 244
442
on which the deceased committed suicide. The act attributed should 
not only be proximate to the time of suicide but should also be of 
such a nature that the deceased was left with no alternative but to 
take the drastic step of committing suicide. 
24.	 Again, in the case of Kamaruddin Dastagir Sanadi versus State 
of Karnataka,7 this Court observed that discord and differences in 
domestic life are quite common in society. Commission of suicide 
largely depends upon the mental state of the victim. Until and unless 
some guilty intention on the part of the accused is established, it is 
ordinarily not possible to convict the accused for an offence under 
Section 306 IPC.
25.	 Prakash versus State of Maharashtra 8 is a case where this Court 
after analysing various decisions on the point summed up the legal 
position in the following manner:
14. Section 306 read with Section 107 of IPC, has been 
interpreted, time and again, and its principles are well 
established. To attract the offence of abetment to suicide, 
it is important to establish proof of direct or indirect acts 
of instigation or incitement of suicide by the accused, 
which must be in close proximity to the commission of 
suicide by the deceased. Such instigation or incitement 
should reveal a clear mens rea to abet the commission of 
suicide and should put the victim in such a position that 
he/she would have no other option but to commit suicide.
25.1.	 In the aforesaid judgment, this Court referred to its earlier 
decision in Sanju @ Sanjay Singh Sengar versus State of M.P.9 
and held that in a given case, even a time gap of 48 hours 
between using of abusive language by the accused and the 
commission of suicide would not amount to a proximate act.
26.	 Having surveyed the relevant legal provisions and the case laws on 
the subject, let us now deal with the material prosecution witnesses. 
27.	 PW-2 is Jayabalaben Dashrathbhai Parmar, the informant. In her 
evidence in chief, she stated that the incident had occurred on the 
7	
(2024) SCC Online SC 3541
8	
2024 INSC 1020
9	
(2002) 5 SCC 371
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
443
Patel Babubhai Manohardas & Ors. v. State of Gujarat
25th of the fourth month (April). She deposed that she worked as a 
clean worker in the water park, having studied up to 10th standard. 
Her husband Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai Parmar was serving in the 
postal department. Her husband’s last posting was at Linch. They 
had 5 children, 3 girls and 2 boys. She stated that she came to know 
later that there was a misappropriation case against her husband 
in his office.
27.1.	 Geetaben of Linch (appellant/accused No. 3) befriended and 
became close to them. That way she started coming home. 
PW-2 alleged that by performing some ‘black art’ and giving 
her husband some liquid substance, she made him her own. 
Geetaben left her husband after taking away his money.
27.2.	 On 25.04.2009, PW-2 had gone to the water park in connection 
with her service. During noon, one Jayantibhai Kalabhai Parmar 
came to her office and told her that her mother-in-law was ill. 
On hearing this, she came back home. In front of her residence, 
she saw a huge crowd. As she entered her house, she saw 
the dead body of her husband. She tried to wake him up by 
shaking him but there was no response.
27.3.	 PW-2 stated that she had some ornaments but those had been 
taken away by the accused persons. She stated that she did 
not notice anything at the time of the death of her husband 
but later on she found one slip (note). She read that note 
wherefrom she could gather that lot many things were written 
in that letter. In the note, it was written that the appellants had 
trapped him and after making video cassette, they used to 
blackmail him. Fed up with such harassment, he committed 
suicide by consuming poison.
27.4.	 She, therefore, lodged a complaint before the police on 
14.05.2009 (Ex. 22/1). 
27.5.	 PW-2 was cross-examined. She stated in her cross-examination 
that the incident had occurred on 25.04.2009. Police had taken 
her two statements on 14.05.2009 and 15.05.2009. In so far 
the misappropriation case of her husband is concerned, PW-2 
stated that she and her husband had paid back Rs. 1,20,000.00 
to the postal department, receipt of which was given. She 
also admitted that there was a case against her husband 
for which he was arrested by the police though released on 
444
bail subsequently. She however admitted that the chit (note) 
was found by her elder brother-in-law (PW-7) and not by her. 
Before she reached her home on 25.04.2004, relatives had 
taken her husband to the hospital.
27.6.	 Jayantibhai, the elder brother-in-law (PW-7), told PW-2 about 
the note on the next day and that is how she came to know 
that her husband had written the note. When panchnama 
was drawn on 25.04.2009, no note was found. From the 
time of death till the lodging of complaint, the note was with 
PW-7. PW-2 did not go to the police station to say about the 
note. She described the relationship between the accused as 
follows: Geetaben (appellant/accused No. 3) who used to work 
in the office of her husband; appellant/accused No. 4 is the 
mother of Geetaben; appellant/accused No. 2 is the husband 
of Geetaben; and appellant/accused No. 1 is a relative of the 
other accused persons. PW-2 stated that neither Geetaben 
nor the accused persons had ever come to her residence. 
27.7.	 PW-2 stated that her husband was suspended from service 
about 2 years back. He was worried about the misappropriation 
case. PW-2 denied the suggestion that the note was not written 
by her husband and that the accused persons had not taken 
away money from him.
28.	 Amrutbhai Karshanbhai Parmar is PW-6. Deceased was his brother. 
On that fateful day, while he was having lunch at home, his niece 
came to him and told him that something had happened to her father. 
Then he went to the house of his brother Dashrathbhai and found 
him lying motionless. He believed that he had consumed poison. 
When he took his brother to the hospital, he was declared dead. At 
that time, his other brother Jayantibhai (PW-7) was also there. On 
searching the body of his brother, PW-6 stated that they found one 
note from his pocket. In that note, the deceased had mentioned 3-4 
names further stating that they were blackmailing him; so he had 
committed suicide. It was in the own handwriting of Dashrathbhai. 
However, he stated that he did not know the persons whose name 
were mentioned in the note. 
29.	 PW-7 is the elder brother of the deceased, Jayantibhai Karshanbhai 
Parmar. Narrating about the incident, he stated that while he was 
at home during noon, his brother Amrutbhai came and told him that 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
445
Patel Babubhai Manohardas & Ors. v. State of Gujarat
Dashrathbhai was lying unconscious. They rushed to Dashrathbhai’s 
house and found him in an unconscious condition. They dialled 
108 and also informed the police. They took Dashrathbhai to the 
hospital where he was declared dead. PW-7 stated that though 
he searched the body of his brother Dashrathbhai, he did not find 
anything. Contradicting the above statement, he stated that though 
one note was found, who found that note and what was written in 
it, he did not know. He stated that he did not know for what reason, 
his brother died.
29.1.	 This witness was declared hostile.
29.2.	 In his cross-examination, he stated that he had no idea that in 
his statement before the police he had stated that one note was 
found in his brother’s pocket wherein it was written that he had 
an affair with Geetaben (appellant No. 3) and for that reason 
he had committed suicide. He denied making any statement 
before the police on 15.05.2009 that his brother Dashrathbhai 
had given the misappropriated money to Geetaben and that 
the accused persons were blackmailing his brother by showing 
him compromising photos and videos of him and Geetaben. 
He also denied making any statement before the police that 
his deceased brother had given ornaments meant for his 
daughter’s marriage to the appellants.
30.	 PW-11 is Champaben Nathalal, women head constable. In her 
evidence, she stated that while she was on duty in the afternoon 
on 14.05.2009, the complaint came to be registered. In her 
cross-examination, she stated that as per Diary No. 17/09 dated 
24.04.2009 (sic), she was on duty when inquest was carried out. 
She stated that no note was found at the time of the inquest and 
no such note was presented at the police station. 
31.	 On a careful analysis of the evidence tendered by the above 
prosecution witnesses, it would reveal that though the incident had 
occurred on 25.04.2009, the complaint was lodged by PW-2 on 
14.05.2009, thus there being a delay of 20 days. Though there is 
a GD entry on 25.04.2009, it appears that barring postmortem and 
inquest, no FIR was registered and no other investigation was carried 
out by the police. It was only after lodging of the complaint that police 
recorded the statement of PW-2 on 14.05.2009 and 15.05.2009 and 
of the other witnesses thereafter. Though delay in lodging of first 
446
information is not always fatal but considering the fact that in this 
case, the delay is of 20 days which has remained unexplained, it 
would have a material bearing on the prosecution case. 
32.	 PW-11 who served as the head constable in the concerned police 
station, deposed that she was on duty in the afternoon of 14.05.2009 
when the complaint came to be registered. In her cross-examination, 
she stated that she was also on duty when Diary Entry No. 17/09 
dated 24.04.2009 was made. She was categorical in her statement 
that no suicide note was found at the time of the inquest; no such 
note was presented at the police station either. 
33.	 There are significant inconsistencies in the evidence of the prosecution 
witnesses regarding the occurrence. PW-2 stated in her substantive 
evidence that on being informed about her mother-in-law’s illness, she 
had come home from her office. On reaching home, she saw a huge 
crowd in front of her residence. As she entered her house, she saw 
the dead body of her husband. However, in her cross-examination, 
she stated that when she reached home on that fateful afternoon, 
the relatives had already taken her husband to the hospital. Such 
inconsistent testimony cast serious doubts about the veracity of the 
evidence of the said prosecution witness. 
34.	 In so far the suicide note is concerned, PW-2 stated that PW-7 
had told her on the next day about the same. It was only then that 
she came to know that her husband had written a suicide note. 
In fact, when the panchnama was drawn on 25.04.2009, no note 
was found on the body of the deceased. She stated that from the 
time of death till the lodging of complaint, the suicide note was with 
PW-7. This again cast serious aspersions about the credibility of 
the suicide note.
35.	 There is another significant inconsistency. PW-6 stated that while 
he was at home having lunch, his niece came and told him that 
something had happened to her father (Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai 
Parmar). So he went to the residence of his brother and found him 
lying motionless. At that time, PW-7 was also present. On the other 
hand, PW-7 stated that while he was at home, his brother PW-6 
came and told him that brother Dashrathbhai was lying unconscious. 
It was thereafter that he rushed to Dashrathbhai’s house. Such 
inconsistencies clearly impeach the credibility of the above two 
prosecution witnesses.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
447
Patel Babubhai Manohardas & Ors. v. State of Gujarat
36.	 That apart, there is nothing on record to show recovery of any 
jewellery (ornaments) by the police from the accused persons. 
No signed cheques of the deceased or cheque book or passbook 
of the deceased were recovered and exhibited in court. In such 
circumstances, the very sub-stratum of the prosecution case that 
the accused persons were making illegal gain by blackmailing the 
deceased falls flat.
37.	 Before we move on to the alleged suicide note, it would be appropriate 
to advert to the postmortem report. As per the said report, cause 
of death was due to consumption of Dichlorvos Organophosphorus 
Non-thio poison. The doctor who carried out the postmortem 
examination, Dr. Prakash Laxmandas, deposed as PW-1. He stated 
that in the course of postmortem examination, 400 cc of coffee 
coloured foul smelling liquid was found in the small intestine and as 
per postmortem note, the same was Dichlorvos Organophosphorus 
Non-thio poison. He stated that if anybody drinks such poisonous 
substance then this type of death can happen.
38.	 However, there is no recovery of any trace of the poison consumed 
by the deceased at the place of occurrence. No bottle/container of 
such poison was recovered from the residence of the deceased. 
Moreover, the prosecution could not place before the court any 
material as to wherefrom the deceased had procured the poison.
39.	 In Kumar @ Shiva Kumar versus State of Karnataka,10 this Court 
opined that in a case of death due to consumption or administering 
of poison, be it homicidal or suicidal, recovery of the trace of such 
poison is crucial. This Court held thus:
46. …….As a general principle, it can be said that in a 
case of death by poisoning, be it homicidal or suicidal 
and which is based on circumstantial evidence, recovery 
of the trace of poison consumed by or administered to 
the deceased is of critical importance. It forms a part of 
the chain; rather it would complete the chain to prove 
homicide or suicide.
40.	 This takes us to the suicide note (Ex. 33). We have already noted 
the delayed and controversial circumstances under which the suicide 
10	
2024 INSC 156
448
note surfaced which makes it highly suspect. Nonetheless, since it 
was exhibited, let us deal with the same. Sum and substance of the 
suicide note allegedly written by Dashrathbhai Karsanbhai Parmar (the 
deceased) with the date given as 24.04.2009 is that appellant No. 3 
had joined his office following the illness of the existing cleaner. She 
used to come to the office daily for cleaning purposes. Slowly they 
developed intimacy. It is alleged that appellant No. 3 had performed 
‘black art’ on the deceased so much so that, he fell in love with her. 
Taking advantage of the situation, she took photographs and video 
of them in compromising position. All the accused persons were 
shameless persons. As they started blackmailing him, he initially paid 
Rs. 80,000.00 to them and thereafter started giving them ornaments. 
He also gave them his passbook and cheque books after signing on 
the cheques. Because of such blackmailing, he had to misappropriate 
money from his office for which he was suspended. It is stated that 
he was totally ruined and, therefore, he had committed suicide as 
he had no other alternative. 
41.	 The suicide note was sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory 
(FSL) for examination. The Deputy Chief Handwriting Expert of 
FSL, Gandhinagar opined that the handwriting was of the deceased. 
However, the prosecution did not examine the Deputy Chief 
Handwriting Expert as an expert witness. The records also do not 
indicate that the accused had admitted genuineness of the report 
of the handwriting expert.
42.	 In Shashi Kumar Banerjee versus Subodh Kumar Banerjee (since 
deceased),11 this Court observed that expert’s evidence as to 
handwriting is opinion evidence. It can rarely, if ever, take the place 
of substantive evidence. Before acting on such opinion evidence, it is 
necessary to see if it is corroborated either by clear direct evidence 
or by circumstantial evidence.
43.	 In the case of Murari Lal versus State of M.P.,12 this Court opined 
that having due regard to the imperfect nature of the science of 
identification of hand-writing, the approach of the court should be 
one of caution. Reasons for the opinion must be carefully probed 
and examined. In an appropriate case, corroboration may be sought. 
11	
AIR 1964 SC 529
12	
(1980) 1 SCC 704
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
449
Patel Babubhai Manohardas & Ors. v. State of Gujarat
Where the reasons for the opinion are convincing and there is no 
reliable evidence throwing a doubt, uncorroborated testimony of a 
handwriting expert may be accepted.
44.	 This Court dealt with the effect of placing reliance on the opinion 
of handwriting expert without examining him in court in Keshav 
Dutt versus State of Haryana.13 One of the questions which fell for 
consideration in that case was whether the opinion of a handwriting 
expert can be admitted in evidence without examination of the 
handwriting expert. In this connection, this Court took the view that 
when the trial court chose to rely on the report of the handwriting 
expert, it ought to have examined the handwriting expert in order 
to give an opportunity to the accused to cross-examine the said 
expert. In that case, it was found that there was nothing on record 
to show that the accused persons had admitted to the report of the 
handwriting expert.
45.	 Finally, even if we take the suicide note as correct and genuine, 
we do not find any act of incitement on the part of the appellants 
proximate to the date on which the deceased committed suicide. No 
act is attributed to the appellants proximate to the time of suicide 
which was of such a nature that the deceased was left with no 
alternative but to commit suicide. In such circumstances, it cannot 
be said that any offence of abetment to commit suicide is made out 
against the appellants.
46.	 Accordingly and in the light of the above, we allow this appeal. 
Consequently, the impugned judgment and order of the High Court 
dated 17.12.2013 and of the trial court dated 12.05.2011 are hereby 
set aside. Since the appellants are already on bail, their bail bonds 
stand discharged.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
13	
(2010) 9 SCC 286