[2025] 9 S.C.R. 362 : 2025 INSC 1058
The State of Telangana & Ors. Etc. 
v. 
Kalluri Naga Narasimha Abhiram & Ors. Etc.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 11217-11269 of 2025)
01 September 2025
[B.R. Gavai, CJI and K. Vinod Chandran,* J.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the wisdom of the legislature in defining a ‘local candidate’ 
entitled to apply under the ‘Competent Authority Seats/Quota’, by 
a subordinate legislation, in consonance with a Presidential Order 
issued u/Art.371D of the Constitution of India, can be interfered 
with and expanded by the High Court u/Art.226.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Arts.371D, 245, 246 – Andhra Pradesh 
Educational Institutions (Regulations of Admissions) Order, 
1974 – Andhra Pradesh Educational Institutions (Regulation 
of Admissions) Second Amendment Order, 1976 – Telangana 
Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admission and 
Prohibition of Capitation Fee), Act, 1983 – s.3 – Telangana 
Medical & Dental Colleges Admission (Admission into MBBS & 
BDS Courses) Rules, 2017 – r.3, amendments in the definition 
of ‘local candidates’ – Challenge to – Division Bench of the 
High Court expanded the definition to include any student 
who produced his residence certificate issued by a competent 
authority of the Government of Telangana; the amended rule 
was read down to mean those petitioners having permanent 
residence or domicile in the State of Telangana, to be considered 
as a local candidate; State Government was directed to frame 
guidelines to determine the domicile/permanent residence 
within the State of Telangana – Interference with:
Held: The amendment provided for the ‘Competent Authority Quota’ 
in the State of Telangana, which on incorporation in the 2017 Rules 
traces its power to legislate, to the Regulation Act of 1983, which 
has been brought out u/Entry 25 of List III, Seventh Schedule r/w 
Art.371D and the Presidential Order of 1974 as also Arts.245 & 
246 – The power enabled under the Presidential Order to make 
* Author
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
363
The State of Telangana & Ors. Etc. v.  
Kalluri Naga Narasimha Abhiram & Ors. Etc.
special provisions for equitable opportunities and facilities in the 
matter of education as conferred u/Art.371D; being education, is 
covered u/Entry 25, and has also to be traced to Arts.245 and 246 – 
The Act of 1983 confer the power on the State to bring out the 
rules in furtherance and in implementation of the Presidential 
Order – Hence, the 2017 Rules is sourced to the power conferred 
under the Presidential Order, at least, in so far as it determines the 
local areas and bring out a definition of local candidates who are 
enabled the privilege of admission to medical colleges by virtue of 
their status as a local candidate as per the definition – The new rule 
provided for reservation to an extent of 85% to those candidates 
who have either studied in the educational institutions in the local 
area for a period of not less than four consecutive academic years 
ending with the academic year in which he qualified for admission 
or where during the whole or any part of the four consecutive years 
ending with the academic year in which he qualified for admission, 
resided in the local area but without studying in any educational 
institutions, which candidate also should have appeared for the 
qualifying examination in the State of Telangana – The pre-amended 
rule defining a local candidate was perfectly in order, which reasoning 
applies squarely to the amended rule also – There was no warrant 
for a reading down when the definition is clear, in consonance with 
the Presidential Order and similar rules having been upheld by this 
Court – No reason to take a different view w.r.t the amended rule 
also; 15% having been conceded to the All-India quota – A further 
amendment proposed, incorporating a proviso to r.3 should allay 
and mitigate the grievances of those who claim that they were taken 
out of the State by compulsion of the movement of their parents 
outside the State by reason of employment in Government/All-India 
Services/Corporations or Public Sector Undertakings constituted 
as an instrumentality of the State of Telangana as also defence 
and paramilitary forces who trace their nativity to the State, subject 
to the conditions thereunder – With only the said reservation, the 
2017 Rules are upheld as it stood amended in 2024 – Impugned 
judgments in the Writ Petitions filed by the students are set aside – 
Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014. [Paras 19, 32, 33, 35, 36]
Constitution of India – Arts.371D, 245 r/w 246 – Andhra Pradesh 
Educational Institutions (Regulations of Admissions) Order, 
1974 – Andhra Pradesh Educational Institutions (Regulation 
of Admissions) Second Amendment Order, 1976 – Telangana 
Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admission and 
364
Supreme Court Reports
Prohibition of Capitation Fee), Act, 1983 – s.3 – Telangana 
Medical & Dental Colleges Admission (Admission into MBBS 
& BDS Courses) Rules, 2017:
Held: The source of power to legislate has to be traced to 
Arts.245 r/w 246, while the entries in the three lists under the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution are fields of legislation, 
demarcated as exclusively available to the Union, the State and 
concurrently; with the Parliament having overriding powers in 
matters enumerated as concurrent – When enacting a legislation, 
it is also permissible that the Parliament or the State Legislature 
may choose to occupy the various fields under the three lists but 
restricting to such demarcation of powers delineated u/Art.246 – 
The States’ power to legislate in the field of education as covered 
u/Entry 25 of List III has all the same to be traced to Arts.245 & 
246, especially when there is no Union legislation on the subject/
field – The power enabled under the Presidential Order to make 
special provisions for equitable opportunities and facilities in the 
matter of education as conferred u/Art.371D; being education, is 
covered u/Entry 25, and has also to be traced to Arts.245 & 246 
– Thus, the Act of 1983 confer the power on the State to bring out 
the rules in furtherance and in implementation of the Presidential 
Order – Hence, the 2017 Rules is sourced to the power conferred 
under the Presidential Order, at least, in so far as it determines 
the local areas and bring out a definition of local candidates who 
are enabled the privilege of admission to medical colleges by 
virtue of their status as a local candidate as per the definition – 
Conduct of examination, admission of students, prescription of fee 
and reservation would be a power conferred on the State u/Entry 
25 of List III – The 2017 Rules is one authorised by the statute, 
which in turn traces the source of its power to the Constitution 
and adopts the definition as available in the Presidential Order. 
[Paras 18-20]
Case Law Cited
Union of India v. H.S. Dhillon [1972] 2 SCR 33 : (1971) 2 SCC 
779; Harakchand Ratanchand Banthia v. Union of India [1970] 1 
SCR 479 : (1969) 2 SCC 166; State of West Bengal v. Kesoram 
Industries Ltd. [2004] 1 SCR 564 : (2004) 10 SCC 201; Tamil 
Nadu Medical Officers Association and Others v. Union of India 
and Others [2020] 8 SCR 583 : (2021) 6 SCC 568; Ahmedabad 
Municipal Corpn. v. Nilaybhai R. Thakore [1999] Supp. 3 SCR 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
365
The State of Telangana & Ors. Etc. v.  
Kalluri Naga Narasimha Abhiram & Ors. Etc.
647 : (1999) 8 SCC 139; Meenakshi Malik v. University of Delhi & 
Ors. [1989] 2 SCR 858 : (1989) 3 SCC 112; C. Surekha v. Union 
of India (1988) 4 SCC 526 : AIR 1989 SC 44; State of Andhra 
Pradesh v. National Thermal Power Corporation Limited [2002] 3 
SCR 278 : (2002) 5 SCC 203; Indian Aluminium Co. v. State of 
Kerala [1996] 2 SCR 23 : (1996) 7 SCC 637; P. Sambamurthy v. 
State of Andhra Pradesh [1987] 1 SCR 879 : (1987) 1 SCC  
362 – referred to.
D.P. Joshi v. State of Madhya Bharat and Ors. [1955] 1 SCR 
1215 : (1955) 1 SCC 58; Kumari N. Vasundara v. State of Mysore 
& Anr. [1971] Supp. 1 SCR 381 : (1971) 2 SCC 22; Pradeep 
Jain v. Union of India [1984] 3 SCR 942 : 1984 AIR 1420; Dinesh 
Kumar (Dr.) v. Motilal Nehru College [1986] 3 SCR 345 : (1986) 3 
SCC 727; Anant Madan v. State of Haryana (1995) 2 SCC 135; 
Rajdeep Ghosh v. State of Assam and Others, 2018 INSC 718 : 
[2018] 11 SCR 329 – relied on.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Telangana Medical & Dental Colleges 
Admission (Admission into MBBS and BDS Courses) Rules, 
2017; Andhra Pradesh Educational Institutions (Regulations of 
Admissions) Order, 1974; Andhra Pradesh Educational Institutions 
(Regulation of Admissions) Second Amendment Order, 1976; 
Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014; Telangana Educational 
Institutions (Regulation of Admission and Prohibition of Capitation 
Fee), Act, 1983; Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Local candidate; Competent Authority Seats/Quota; Presidential 
Order issued under Article 371D of Constitution of India; Subordinate 
legislation; Medical and Dental Colleges Admission; Admission to 
medical colleges by virtue of status as a local candidate; Local 
candidate in relation to a local area; Local area; Benefit to local 
candidates in the State of Telangana; Preferential admission to 
the medical courses; Admission to the course of MBBS and BDS; 
Power to legislate; Entry 25 of List III; Instrumentality of the State; 
Students from the marginalized sections; Expansion of definition 
by the High Court; Undivided State of Andhra Pradesh; Equitable 
opportunities; Matters of public employment and education; Articles 
245 and 246 of the Constitution of India.
366
Supreme Court Reports
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s).  
11217-11269 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 05.09.2024 of the High Court 
for The State of Telangana at Hyderabad in WP Nos. 21910, 22025, 
22097, 22101, 22104, 22144, 22149, 22156, 22162, 22260, 22285, 
22330, 22374, 22376, 22377, 22389, 22390, 22399, 22401, 22405, 
22435, 22437, 22440, 22443, 22447, 22465, 22537, 22658, 22717, 
22738, 22862, 22892, 23061, 23079, 23182, 23271, 23346, 23430, 
23471, 23490, 23509, 23517, 23533, 23720, 23722, 23723, 23929, 
23961, 24005, 24011, 24283, 24307 and 24353 of 2024
With
Civil Appeal Nos. 11270, 11271 and 24826 of 2025 and WP (C) 
Nos. 637, 672, and 661 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
A. Sudarshan Reddy, Advocate General, Dr. Abhishek Singhvi, 
Gopal Sankarnarayanan, DVSS Somayajulu, P.B. Suresh, Sr. 
Advs. Ms. Priyansha Sharma, Siddivardhan, P. Venkatraju, Kumar 
Abhishek, Ms. M. Harshini, Kumar Nikhil, V. Sridhar Reddy, Abhijit 
Sengupta, Swayam Prakash Kashyap, Sravan Kumar Karanam, 
Irshad Ahmad, S Manoj Selvaraj, Ms. Zohra Bano, Jude Rohit, 
Maria Mugesh Kannan, Vishal Sinha, Satish Pandey, Akbar Ali, 
Ms. Jay Jaimini Pandey, Sadiya Shakeel, Dr. Nafis A Siddiqui, Braj 
Kishore Mishra, Vipin Nair, Ms. M.b.ramya, Aditya Narendranath, 
Ms. Deeksha Gupta.
Advs. for the Respondents:
P.B. Suresh, DVSS Somayajulu, Raghenth Basant, Prakash 
Deu Naik, Mayur Reddy, S. Sriram, Sr. Advs., Vipin Nair, Aditya 
Narendranath, Ms. M.B.Ramya, Ms. Deeksha Gupta, Ms. Bhabna 
Das, Vishnu Kanth Mundada, Ms. Hima Bharadwaj, Dnyaneshwar 
N. Telange, Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad, Shubham Kumar Pandey, 
Vairawan A.S, Krishna Dev Jagarlamudi, Arpit Kumar Mishra, Alluri 
Divakar Reddy, Ms. Oshi Verma, Mukesh Kumar Mishra, Sangram 
Patnaik, Jha Amlendu Kumar Akhilesh Kumar, Suryavir, Pavan 
Kumar Chaturvedi, Ms. Swayamsidha Patnaik, Guntur Pramod 
Kumar, Sravan Kumar Karanam, Ms. Pankhuri Shrivastava, 
Ms. Neelam Sharma, Alekshendra Sharma, Aditya Kumar, 
V. Sridhar Reddy, Abhijit Sengupta, Rohit Jaiswal,Deepak 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
367
The State of Telangana & Ors. Etc. v.  
Kalluri Naga Narasimha Abhiram & Ors. Etc.
Bahl, Abid Ali Beeran, Sriram P., Nalukettil Anandhu S. Nair, 
Ms. Maneesha Sunilkumar, Irshad Ahmad, Shaik Mohamad Haneef, 
Ms. A Deepthi, Ms. Ratna Prabha, Mukesh Kumar Mishra, Sangram 
Patnaik, Jha Amlendu Kumar Akhilesh Kumar, Suryavir, Pavan 
Kumar Chaturvedi, Ms. Swayamsidha Patnaik, Rahul Shukla, 
Mrs. Bachita Baruah Shukla, Ramandeep Singh, Ms. Vagisha 
Tripathi, Kumar Dushyant Singh, Miss Akansha, Akash Kumar 
Baglekar, Anurag, Kunwar Vishal Singh, Ms. Uma Prasuna Bachu, 
Mahendra Kumawat, Ms. Ritu Reniwal, Mahfooz Ahsan Nazki, Vivek 
Rajan D.B, Hemant Gupta, Saaketh Kasibhatla, Kartik Brundavan, 
M. Dharun Lakshman, Guntur Pramod Kumar, Ishaan George, 
Ms. Dr. Rukma George, Archit Jain, Ashhab Khan, Aman Ahluwalia, 
B. Shravanth Shanker, Ms. Prerna Robin, Ms. Grahita Agarwal, 
B. Yeshwanth Raj, K Sita Rama Rao, Arvind Gupta, Anil Kumar 
Sahu, Kanav Bhardwaj, Ms. Uma Prasuna Bachu, Ms. Ritu Reniwal.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K. Vinod Chandran, J.
Leave granted. 
2.	
Whether the wisdom of the legislature in defining a ‘local candidate’ 
entitled to apply under the ‘Competent Authority Seats/Quota’, by 
a subordinate legislation, in consonance with a Presidential Order 
issued under Article 371D of the Constitution of India, can be 
interfered with and expanded by the High Court under Article 226, 
is the question arising in these batch of appeals.
3.	
The State of Telangana in their appeals allege that the expansion 
of the definition, on the subjective satisfaction of the High Court, 
would lead to frustrating the special provision under Article 371D, 
intended to confer a benefit to those local candidates in the State of 
Telangana who can be given preferential admission to the medical 
courses. The true test being not the claim of nativity by descent, but 
by their residence and their continued education within the State, 
culminating with the appearance in the qualifying examination within 
the State, establishing the real bonding and true integration into the 
local environment. This raises a valid presumption that they would 
continue working, after qualifying, in the locality, serving the people of 
368
Supreme Court Reports
the State. The respondents-students, however, urge that the definition 
of local candidate itself is gross and does not reckon the vagaries of 
life and employment of the parents, which takes the children away 
from the State, whose roots remain all the same within the State.
4.	
The State counters that the definition has been molded in such a 
manner as to not only benefit those people who studied and resided 
for a considerable period within the State; but also ensure that those 
students who come from the marginalized sections are included. Such 
persons are those who are born into families who do not have the 
capacity to send their children outside the State and the Country for 
availing better educational facilities or expert and focused training 
to appear for the competitive entrance examinations. Most likely 
these are the persons who would remain within the State and offer 
their services to those residing in the State, which has a dearth of 
qualified medical practitioners. 
5.	
We heard Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Mr. Gopal Sankarnarayanan, 
learned senior counsel and Mr. A. Sudarshan Reddy, learned Advocate 
General appearing for the appellants/State/University and Mr. P.B. 
Suresh, Mr. Raghenth Basant, Mr. Prakash Deu Naik, learned senior 
counsel and Mr. Krishna Dev Jagarlamudi, learned counsel appearing 
for the respective respondents/student-aspirants and Mr. S. Sriram, 
learned senior counsel appearing for the impleader.
6.	
Two separate Rules containing almost similar definitions were under 
challenge before the High Court. The first batch of Writ Petitions 
challenged the Telangana Medical & Dental Colleges Admission 
(Admission into MBBS & BDS Courses) Rules, 20171, the judgment in 
which was passed on 29.08.2023. Closely following suit, the second 
batch of Writ Petitions challenging the amendments brought into the 
definition of ‘local candidates’ vide GOMS No.33 dated 19.07.2024 
was also allowed on 05.09.2024. Both these judgments are in appeal 
before us. In the meanwhile, by way of an interim order, there were 
admissions made on the consent of the State as per the expanded 
definition ordered by the High Court, subject to the final result of the 
appeals before this Court. 
7.	
We will first briefly notice the genesis and the history of the preferential 
admissions to the professional courses in the undivided State of 
1	
hereinafter referred to as, ‘the Rules of 2017’
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
369
The State of Telangana & Ors. Etc. v.  
Kalluri Naga Narasimha Abhiram & Ors. Etc.
Andhra Pradesh and then after division, in the newly formed State 
of Telangana. Article 371D as it stood before the division referred 
to special provisions with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh 
for providing equitable opportunities and facilities to the people 
belonging to the State, both in the matters of public employment 
and education, as enabled by a Presidential Order. After division, 
the nominal heading was substituted to include State of Telangana, 
which enabled the President by order to provide, having regard 
to the requirements of each State, for equitable opportunities and 
facilities for the people belonging to different parts of such States, 
in the matter of public employment and in the matter of education, 
in exercise of the powers conferred thereby. The Andhra Pradesh 
Educational Institutions (Regulations of Admissions) Order, 19742 
was published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part II dated 
01.07.1974; which came into force on the same day. It divided the 
State into three local areas of Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and 
Rayalaseema as applicable to the Osmania University, Andhra 
Pradesh University and Sri Venkateswara University respectively. 
8.	
The Presidential Order, originally provided that a local candidate in 
relation to a local area would be such person who has studied in 
an educational institution/institutions in such local area for a period 
of not less than four consecutive academic years ending with the 
academic year in which he appeared or first appeared in the relevant 
qualifying examination. It was also provided that when a student has 
resided within the local area in the four consecutive academic years 
ending with the academic year in which he qualified and has not 
studied in any educational institution, he would be entitled to seek 
admission as a local candidate; which benefit is for students who 
qualify through private study or the open school system. The Andhra 
Pradesh Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admissions) Second 
Amendment Order, 1976 amplified the said definition to take in 
students who had during the preceding years of qualification, studied 
in different local areas. The students who studied in different local 
areas, by the amendment, would have the benefit of being considered 
in the local area where he has studied the maximum time within a 
seven-year period. This benefit was also conferred on any resident in 
different local areas in the preceding seven years who had qualified 
2	
hereinafter referred to as, ‘the Presidential Order’
370
Supreme Court Reports
in the examinations held in one of the local areas but not studied 
in any educational institution. The relevant qualifying examination 
is specified in the Presidential Order as the examination, passing of 
which is the minimum educational qualification for admission to the 
course of study for which admission is sought; herein specifically 
MBBS and BDS.
9.	
The Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 provided for 
continuance of the benefit under Article 371D for ten years in the 
newly formed States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. The first 
challenge was to the Rules of 2017 dated 05.07.2017. The local 
areas in the said orders were also divided into three; being Andhra, 
Rayalseema & Telangana, respectively associated with the three 
Universities and the definition of local candidates was in consonance 
with what was available in the Presidential Order. The Division Bench 
of the High Court formulated eight questions which are noticed 
hereunder, in seriatim: -
(i) Whether the Rules of 2017 are framed under Article 
371D and the Presidential Order?
(ii) Whether the Rules of 2017 are framed under the 
Telangana Educational Institutions (Regulation of 
Admission and Prohibition of Capitation Fee), Act, 19833?
(iii) Whether the Regulation Act of 1983 is framed under 
Article 371D of the Constitution or under the Presidential 
Order?
(iv) Whether the validity of the Order of 1974 was examined 
by the Supreme Court in C.Surekha v. Union of India4 ?
(v) Whether the High Court could examine the validity of 
the Rules of 2017? 
(vi) & (vii) whether the petitioners fall under either of the 
definitions of the Rules of 2017; Rule 3(III)(B) or 3(III)(C)?
(viii) whether Rule3(III)B of the Rules of 2017 is to be 
struck down or read down?
3	
Hereinafter referred to as, ‘the Admission Act of 1983’
4	
(1988) 4 SCC 526
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
371
The State of Telangana & Ors. Etc. v.  
Kalluri Naga Narasimha Abhiram & Ors. Etc.
10.	 Insofar as the first question is concerned, looking at the notification 
dated 05.07.2017 and the reference to the Admission Act of 1983, 
it was found that the Rules of 2017 was not one framed invoking 
the powers conferred under the Presidential Order issued under 
Article 371D.
11.	 On the basis of the recitals in the notification, the second question 
was answered in the affirmative, finding the Rules of 2017 to be 
made under the Admission Act of 1983. The Admission Act of 1983, 
answering the third question, was also found to be not enacted either 
under Article 371D or the Presidential Order.
12.	 It was found that the source of power to enact the Admission Act of 
1983 and bring out the Rules of 2017 were perceived to be under 
Entry 25 of List III of the Seventh Schedule. The Admission Act of 
1983 did not trace the source to either Article 371D or the Presidential 
Order, in which event, neither was that Act enacted, nor the Rules of 
2017 said to have been brought out, under the Presidential Order. 
We are unable to accede to the above reasoning for more than one 
reason. 
13.	 It is not in dispute that the Presidential Order brought out under Article 
371D of the Constitution enabled the State to provide for equitable 
opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to the different 
parts of the State inter alia in the matter of education. A reading of 
the Admission Act of 1983, specifically Section 3 is relevant in this 
context, which is as under: -
3. (1) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, 
admission into educational institutions shall be made 
either on the basis of the marks obtained in the qualifying 
examination or on the basis of the ranking assigned in the 
entrance test conducted by such authority and in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 
(1A) [XXX]
[Provided that admission into Agriculture, Dental, 
Engineering, Medical, Pharmacy and Veterinary Colleges 
shall be made on the basis of ranking assigned by 
giving weightage to the marks secured in the relevant 
group subjects namely, Biology, Physics, Chemistry or 
Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, as the case may be, 
372
Supreme Court Reports
in the Intermediate Public Examination or equivalent 
examination and weightage to the marks secured in the 
common entrance test as may be prescribed.] 
(2) The admission into educational institutions under sub-
section (1) shall be subject to such rules as may be made 
by the Government in regard to reservation of seats to 
the members belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes and Backward Classes and other categories of 
students as may be notified by the Government in this 
behalf and the Andhra Pradesh Educational Institutions 
(Regulation of Admission) Order, 1974.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-sections (1) and (2), 
it shall be lawful for the Government, to admit students 
belonging to other States on reciprocal basis and the 
nominees of the Government of India, into Medical and 
Engineering Colleges in accordance with such rules as 
may be prescribed: 
Provided that admission of students into the Regional 
Engineering College, Warangal to the extent of one-half 
of the total number of seats shall be in accordance with 
the guidelines issued by the Government of India, from 
time to time.
(underlining by us for emphasis)
14.	 The provision emphasised above specifically enable rules to be 
brought out not only with respect to reservation of seats to the 
members belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and 
Backward Classes, but also other categories of students, as may 
be notified by the Government in this behalf and the Presidential 
Order has been specifically referred to in the above Act, which went 
unnoticed by the Division Bench.
15.	 A Constitution Bench decision of Seven Learned Judges of this 
Court in Union of India v. H.S. Dhillon5 held, following yet another 
Constitution Bench of Five Learned Judges in Harakchand 
5	
(1971) 2 SCC 779 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
373
The State of Telangana & Ors. Etc. v.  
Kalluri Naga Narasimha Abhiram & Ors. Etc.
Ratanchand Banthia v. Union of India6, that the power to legislate is 
given to the appropriate legislatures by Article 246 of the Constitution. 
It was declared that ‘The entries in the three lists are only legislative 
heads or fields of legislation; they demarcate the area over which 
the appropriate legislatures can operate’ (sic). 
16.	 Usefull reference can be made to yet another decision of a Constitution 
Bench of this Court in State of West Bengal v. Kesoram Industries 
Ltd.7, from which we make the following extract to the extent it is 
relevant for this case, since the issue regarding the residuary powers 
vested in the Parliament, which was the subject matter of the cited 
decision, does not arise in the present case. The relevant part of 
paragraph No.31 reads as under: -
31. Article 245 of the Constitution is the fountain 
source of legislative power. It provides — subject to 
the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make 
laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India, and 
the legislature of a State may make laws for the whole 
or any part of the State. The legislative field between 
Parliament and the legislature of any State is divided by 
Article 246 of the Constitution. Parliament has exclusive 
power to make laws with respect to any of the matters 
enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule, called the 
“Union List”. Subject to the said power of Parliament, 
the legislature of any State has power to make laws with 
respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III, called 
the “Concurrent List”. Subject to the abovesaid two, the 
legislature of any State has exclusive power to make laws 
with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II, 
called the “State List”. 
(bold font for emphasis)
17.	 In State of Andhra Pradesh v. National Thermal Power Corporation 
Limited8, the perceived conflict between Entries 53 and 54 of List II 
of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution was considered. Entry 53 
6	
(1969) 2 SCC 166
7	
(2004) 10 SCC 201 
8	
(2002) 5 SCC 203 
374
Supreme Court Reports
provided for tax on consumption of electricity while Entry 54 provided 
for tax on sale of goods. The conflict was argued, especially on the 
basis of the findings of this Court in Indian Aluminium Co. v. State 
of Kerala9 that electricity is goods since supply and consumption 
take place without any hiatus bringing it within the definition of a 
sale. Holding that even when there is perceived conflict between 
two entries, an effort should be made to harmonise it, it was found 
that several entries in the three lists of the Seventh Schedule 
are legislative heads or fields of legislation and not the source of 
legislative empowerment. “Competence to legislate has to be traced 
to the Constitution. The division of powers between Parliament and 
the State Legislatures to legislate by reference to territorial limits is 
defined by Article 245”(sic). Harmonising Entries 53 and 54, it was 
held that tax could be levied on sale of electricity under Entry 54 
and even if there is no sale by the manufacturer, its consumption 
by the manufacturer itself could be taxed under Entry 53; both by 
a single piece of legislation. It was held that a legislation could fall 
within the scope of more than one Entry. 
18.	 What can be clearly perceived from the afore cited decisions is 
that the source of power to legislate has to be traced to Article 245 
read with 246, while the entries in the three lists under the Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution are fields of legislation, demarcated as 
exclusively available to the Union, the State and concurrently; with 
the Parliament having overriding powers in matters enumerated as 
concurrent. When enacting a legislation, it is also permissible that 
the Parliament or the State Legislature may choose to occupy the 
various fields under the three lists but restricting to such demarcation 
of powers delineated under Article 246.
19.	 Importing the above dictum to the subject issue, the States’ power to 
legislate in the field of education as covered under Entry 25 of LIST III 
has all the same to be traced to Articles 245 & 246, especially when 
there is no Union legislation on the subject/field. The power enabled 
under the Presidential Order to make special provisions for equitable 
opportunities and facilities in the matter of education as conferred 
under Article 371D; being education, is covered under Entry 25, and 
has also to be traced to Articles 245 & 246. The Act of 1983, brought 
9	
(1996) 7 SCC 637
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
375
The State of Telangana & Ors. Etc. v.  
Kalluri Naga Narasimha Abhiram & Ors. Etc.
out thus, consequentially confer the power on the State to bring out 
the rules in furtherance and in implementation of the Presidential 
Order. The Rules of 2017, hence, is sourced to the power conferred 
under the Presidential Order, at least, in so far as it determines the 
local areas and bring out a definition of local candidates who are 
enabled the privilege of admission to medical colleges by virtue of 
their status as a local candidate as per the definition.
20.	 A Constitution Bench of this Court in Tamil Nadu Medical Officers 
Association and Others v. Union of India and Others10, overruled 
an earlier decision of a Three Judge Bench which found the 
reservation given to in-service candidates for admission to post-
graduate courses in medicine, unconstitutional. It was held that Entry 
66 in List I has a very limited scope insofar as the power conferred 
being coordination and determination of standards which alone is in 
the exclusive domain of the Union. However, conduct of examination, 
admission of students, prescription of fee and reservation would be 
a power conferred on the State under Entry 25 of List III. The Rules 
of 2017 is one authorised by the statute, which in turn traces the 
source of its power to the Constitution and adopts the definition as 
available in the Presidential Order. 
21.	 Insofar as the judgment in C. Surekha (supra) the decision in 
P.Sambamurthy v. State of A.P.11 was noticed, wherein it was held 
that Article 371D does not militate against the basic structure of the 
Constitution, except sub-article (5) of Article 371D; which led to denial 
of the benefit of judicial review. The other question with respect to 
reservation of 15% seats to the All-India Entrance Examination was 
kept open. We find ourselves to be in full agreement with only this 
finding of the High Court in the impugned judgment. 
22.	 Now, we come to the question of the purported reading down carried 
out by the Division Bench of the High Court. Having found that C. 
Surekha (supra) did not interpret the Presidential Order of 1974, the 
impugned judgment looked first at whether the petitioners fall under 
the definition clauses at Clause 3 III (B) or (C). After extracting the 
definitions as available in the Presidential Order and the Rules of 
2017; which are identical, it was found that none of the petitioners 
10	
(2021) 6 SCC 568
11	
(1987) 1 SCC 362 
376
Supreme Court Reports
fall under the said definitions. The facts varied from case to case, but 
there were even students who studied from the first to tenth standard 
within the local area of the State of Telangana, under the Rules of 
2017, but moved away for the secondary and higher secondary 
studies. The reasons were multifarious and included varied situations 
of life, including transfer of parents, better educational opportunities 
and so on and so forth. The categoric finding was that none of the 
petitioners fall under the two definitions of ‘study’ or ‘residence’; which 
is also just prior to the higher secondary qualifying examination, the 
appearance in which had to be undertaken in the State of Telangana.
23.	 Having found so, the Court went to the further question as to 
whether the rule defining a local candidate is arbitrary and violative 
of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Relying upon the decisions 
in Ahmedabad Municipal Corpn. v. Nilaybhai R. Thakore12 and 
Meenakshi Malik v. University of Delhi & Ors.13 as also decisions 
of various High Courts, it was found to be violative of the mandate 
contained in Article 14 of the Constitution. Relying on the trite principle 
that when a harmonious construction is possible, no provision of 
a statute or legislation should be struck down, the Division Bench 
thus expanded the definition to include any student who produced 
his residence certificate issued by a competent authority of the 
Government of Telangana. At the outset, we have to state that 
without a definition of what constitutes residence or at least without 
reference to a statute or rule prescribing the issuance of a residence 
certificate, the directions issued by the High Court would only result 
in an anomalous situation, making the reservation unworkable and 
open to a series of litigation. 
24.	 Yet again, as has been argued by the State and the University, similar 
provisions have been upheld by this Court in a number of decisions 
over very many years. D.P.Joshi v. State of Madhya Bharat and 
Ors.14 upheld the levy of capitation fee on those students residing 
outside Madhya Bharat. The object of the classification, found to 
be justified, was the State’s desire to help at least to some extent 
the students who are its residents, encouraging education of the 
12	
(1999) 8 SCC 139
13	
(1989) 3 SCC 112 
14	
(1955) 1 SCC 58
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
377
The State of Telangana & Ors. Etc. v.  
Kalluri Naga Narasimha Abhiram & Ors. Etc.
indigenous people, especially when the State spends money for 
the upkeep and running of the educational institutions; therein a 
medical college. The aforesaid decision was followed in Kumari 
N.Vasundara v. State of Mysore & Anr.15 which prescribed conditions 
of residence for ten years in the State of Mysore, at any time prior 
to the date of application for the purpose of admission. Therein 
also an argument was raised that, candidates whose parents, out 
of necessity or by compelling reasons of transfers, while remaining 
out of the Mysore State, cannot afford to arrange for the residence 
of their children inside the State. The argument was repelled by this 
Court on two grounds. It was held that mere likelihood of hardship 
cannot result in the striking down of a rule and in any event, hardship 
is likely to arise in the working of almost any rule, especially when 
applied to a selection of a limited number of candidates, which alone 
cannot render the rule unconstitutional. It was clearly held that, for 
relief against such hardship and reducing the wide gap between 
the number of available seats and the number of aspirants, the 
grievance would have to be addressed elsewhere; clearly indicating 
the policy formulation by the government/legislature. The exclusive 
domain for policy formulation was not liable to be interfered with, 
unless validly challenged on gross discrimination, clear arbitrariness, 
patent illegality, perversity or unconstitutionality.
25.	 Pradeep Jain v. Union of India16, considered the question whether 
admission to institutions of higher learning situated in a State can be 
confined to those having their domicile within their State or who are 
residents within the State for a specific number of years, irrespective 
of merit and whether this would be consistent with the constitutional 
values. Referring to the earlier decisions of this Court, it was held 
that at least in the scheme of admission to medical colleges, there 
can be a departure from the principle of selection based on merit 
to bring about real equality of opportunity between those who are 
unequal. It was famously observed that ‘equality must not remain 
mere idle incantation, but it must become a living reality for the large 
masses of people’ (sic). Such departure was held to be justified on 
two considerations; one the State interest and the other a region’s 
claim of backwardness.
15	
(1971) 2 SCC 22
16	
1984 AIR 1420
378
Supreme Court Reports
26.	 Referring to D.P.Joshi (supra), it was found that therein the capitation 
fee for persons belonging to outside Madhya Bharat was justified on 
the assumption that those who are bona fide residents of Madhya 
Bharat would settle down and serve the needs of the people in the 
State, after they qualify; though, there was nothing observed in the 
judgment as to whether there was any such justification pleaded. 
It was held that despite intra-state discrimination between persons 
resident in different districts and regions of a State was frowned upon 
by this Court, institutional reservation effected through university-
wise distribution was upheld. Referring also to D.P.Joshi (supra) 
and Kumari N. Vasundara (supra); while unreservedly condemning 
wholesale reservation on the basis of domicile or residential 
requirement, 70% reservation was prescribed as an outer limit with 
30% being made available on an All-India basis. The percentage 
was subsequently increased to 85% in the case of Dinesh Kumar 
(Dr.) v. Motilal Nehru College17, with the prescription of an entrance 
examination on an all-India basis for the remaining 15% seats. 
27.	 Anand Madaan v. State of Haryana18, provided for a reservation 
to those who are residents or domiciled in the State of Haryana 
with a further condition of having studied in the 10th, 10+1 and 10+2 
classes as a regular candidate in recognised institutions in Haryana. 
An exception was carved out insofar as employees of the State 
Government/All India services borne in the Haryana cadre, employees 
of statutory bodies or Corporations established under an Act of the 
State of Haryana and the children/wards of the employees of Indian 
Defence Services and Paramilitary services belonging to the Haryana 
State. This Court specifically referred to Meenakshi Malik13 which 
was a lone case where a student’s parents in Government service 
were posted outside the country in the last two years of education, 
which was otherwise commenced and continued in Delhi, which was 
held to be condonable. Anand Madaan18 found, that was a singular 
grievance which similar contention was not available to any of the 
petitioners and upheld the rule in the State of Haryana. 
28.	 We have to immediately notice that the learned Advocate General 
for the State of Telangana who appeared in the case has assured 
17	
(1986) 3 SCC 727
18	
(1995) 2 SCC 135
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
379
The State of Telangana & Ors. Etc. v.  
Kalluri Naga Narasimha Abhiram & Ors. Etc.
us that there would be mitigation insofar as such candidates; which 
we will refer to a little later. 
29.	 Rajdeep Ghosh v. State of Assam and Others19 was another case 
in which reservation was made for local candidates who studied all 
the classes from Class 8 to 12 in the State of Assam, who have also 
passed the qualifying examination or its equivalent from the institutes 
situated in the State of Assam. Relying on the cited precedents, this 
Court held that the petitioners could not place any relevant data 
showing that there were no coaching facilities available in Assam 
and when some students can afford to obtain coaching in other 
States, they stand on a different footing, belonging to an affluent 
class who cannot be adjusted in the State quota, especially when 
they can seek admission in the All India quota, thus, making the 
Rule not totally exclusionary.
30.	 In the wake of the binding precedents, holding the field for three 
score and ten years; a lifetime, we are unable to accede to the 
claim of the students who did not fall under the definition that the 
rule is exclusionary, arbitrary and constitutionally invalid. We cannot 
but notice that in Ahmedabad Municipal Corpn. (supra), the 
rule providing reservation to those local students, qualifying from 
educational institutions situated within the municipal limits were 
merely expanded to include the Ahmedabad Urban Development Area 
(AUDA). The Rule was justified in the counter affidavit filed on behalf 
of the Ahmedabad Municipality, on the ground that the Medical College 
in question was established to cater to the needs of the students 
residing in Ahmedabad city and hence only those students who 
qualified from schools or colleges within the Ahmedabad Municipality 
were entitled to be treated as local students. The question posed 
by this Court was whether those who are residents of Ahmedabad 
city, who also contribute to the revenue of the Municipality, could 
be denied the status of local students, merely for reason that they 
study in schools outside the Municipality limits, but within the AUDA. 
The rule was held to include even the students of the institutions in 
the AUDA on the ground that otherwise it creates a differentia within 
the class of students of Ahmedabad on the basis of their acquiring 
qualifications from schools within the Municipal limit or within the 
19	
2018 INSC 718
380
Supreme Court Reports
limits of AUDA, which would be arbitrary and violative of Article 14. 
There is no such unintelligible differentia arising in this case.
31.	 For all the reasons noticed above, we are unable to uphold the 
impugned judgment dated 29.08.2023 of the High Court of Telangana.
32.	 Now, we come to the challenge against the amended Rules of 2023. As 
has been argued by the State and the University, the Reorganisation 
Act of Andhra Pradesh permitted continuance of the benefit under 
Article 371D in the newly formed States for a period of ten years 
and there was a requirement for a new legislation, after the expiry 
of that period. This prompted the State to amend the rule by G.O 
(MS) No.33 dated 19.07.2024, incorporating a fresh Rule 3 in the 
Rules of 2017. The said amendment provided for the ‘Competent 
Authority Quota’ in the State of Telangana, which on incorporation 
in the Rules of 2017 traces its power to legislate, to the Regulation 
Act of 1983, which we already found has been brought out under 
Entry 25 of List III, Seventh Schedule read with Article 371D and 
the Presidential Order of 1974 as also Articles 245 & 246. The new 
rule provided for reservation to an extent of 85% to those candidates 
who have either (i) studied in the educational institutions in the local 
area for a period of not less than four consecutive academic years 
ending with the academic year in which he qualified for admission or 
(ii) where during the whole or any part of the four consecutive years 
ending with the academic year in which he qualified for admission, 
resided in the local area but without studying in any educational 
institutions, which candidate also should have appeared for the 
qualifying examination in the State of Telangana. The Division Bench, 
considering the amended rule, noticed the decision in Pradeep 
Jain16, Anand Madaan18 and Rajdeep Ghosh19 having laid down 
that the requirement of residence/domicile for admission to MBBS/
BDS course is permissible, but without anything more proceeded 
to consider whether the amended rule has to be struck down or 
read down. After looking at the principle of reading down, again 
Meenakshi Malik13 and the earlier judgment dated 29.08.2023 were 
noticed to find that the amended rule will have to be read down to 
mean those petitioners having permanent residence or domicile in 
the State of Telangana, who will have to be considered as a local 
candidate. At this point, it was pointed out from the Bar that there 
are no guidelines/rules framed by the State Government to ascertain 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
381
The State of Telangana & Ors. Etc. v.  
Kalluri Naga Narasimha Abhiram & Ors. Etc.
the domicile/permanent residence within the State of Telangana. The 
State Government was directed to frame guidelines to determine 
such domicile/residence and directed to consider writ petitioners as 
per the newly framed guidelines/rules.
33.	 We have already held that the pre-amended rule defining a local 
candidate was perfectly in order, which reasoning applies squarely 
to the amended rule also. There was no warrant for a reading down 
when the definition is clear, in consonance with the Presidential Order 
and similar rules having been upheld by this Court as coming out from 
the binding precedents. We find no reason to take a different view 
with respect to the amended rule also; 15% having been conceded 
to the All-India quota.
34.	 We also observe that the learned Advocate General has handed 
over a further amendment proposed, incorporating a proviso to Rule 
3 as follows: -
I. Provided that a candidate who studies outside Telangana 
for any period during the requisite four consecutive 
academic years ending with the academic year in which 
he appeared, or as the case may be, first appeared in 
the relevant qualifying examination will be eligible to be 
considered if they fall under any of the below categories:
1. Children of employees of the Telangana State 
Government who have served or are serving outside 
Telangana corresponding to the candidate’s year/s 
of study outside Telangana
2. Children of serving or retired employees belonging 
to the Telangana cadre of All India Services (IAS/
IFS/IPS) who have served or are serving outside 
Telangana corresponding to the candidate’s year/s 
of study outside Telangana
3. Children of defence personnel/ex-servicemen/ 
Central Armed Police Force service who at the time 
of joining service, have declared their hometown to 
be in the State of Telangana and who have served 
or are serving outside Telangana corresponding to 
the candidate’s year/s of study outside Telangana
382
Supreme Court Reports
4. Children of employees of a Corporation/Agency/ 
Instrumentality under Government of Telangana, 
liable to be transferred anywhere in India as per 
the terms and conditions of his/her employment, 
who have served or are serving outside Telangana 
corresponding to the candidate’s year/s of study 
outside Telangana
II. Subject to the candidate submitting Certificate of 
employment from the competent authority for the 
candidate’s father/mother’s service outside the State for 
the period corresponding to the candidate’s year/s of study 
outside Telangana.
35.	 The said proviso should allay and mitigate the grievances of those 
who claim that they were taken out of the State by compulsion 
of the movement of their parents outside the State by reason of 
employment in Government/All-India Services/ Corporations or Public 
Sector Undertakings constituted as an instrumentality of the State 
of Telangana as also defence and paramilitary forces who trace 
their nativity to the State, subject to the conditions thereunder. With 
only the said reservation, we uphold the Rules of 2017 as it stood 
amended in 2024. We were told that in the previous academic year 
on concession made by the Government before this Court, students 
who did not fall strictly under the definition were granted admission 
to mitigate the grievance of the hardship alleged and argued. We 
make it clear that the admissions so made shall not be disturbed.
36.	 The appeals of the State and the University are allowed, setting 
aside both the impugned judgments in the Writ Petitions filed by the 
students. The Writ Petitions and the SLP filed by the students before 
this Court, as a consequence stand dismissed; however, with the 
reservation insofar as candidates who are covered by the proviso 
to Rule 3 as specified in paragraph 34 above. No order as to costs.
37.	 Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Matters disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey