[2025] 3 S.C.R. 341 : 2025 INSC 306
The State of Goa & Anr. 
v. 
Namita Tripathi
(Criminal Appeal No. 1060 of 2025)
03 March 2025
[B.R. Gavai and K.V. Viswanathan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The Judicial Magistrate First Class (JMFC) had issued process to 
the respondent pursuant to the complaint filed by the appellants 
alleging violation by the respondent of the provisions of the 
Factories Act, 1948 and thereby committing offences punishable 
u/s.92 thereof. However, the High Court had quashed the said 
order of the JMFC. Was the High Court justified in quashing the 
process issued.
Headnotes†
Factories Act, 1948 – ss.2(k), 2(m), 92 – Goa Factories Rules, 
1985 – rr.3,4,6 – An inspection was conducted in the premises 
of the respondent wherein the business of Professional 
Laundry Service was carried on, it was found that the 
respondent did not possess factory approved plans – Further, 
the premises were being used as a factory without obtaining 
a valid factory licence – A complaint was filed – The JMFC 
issued summons to respondents – However, the High Court 
by the impugned order quashed the order issuing process – 
Correctness:
Held: There is no doubt that the business of laundry carried 
on by the respondent involved cleaning and washing of clothes 
including dry cleaning – Admittedly, more than 9 workers were 
employed in the centralized processing unit and also used the 
aid of power – The Act of 1948 defines “manufacturing process” 
and clearly “washing, cleaning” and the activities carried out by 
the respondent with a view to its use, delivery or disposal are 
squarely attracted – The contention of the respondent that dry 
* Author
342
cleaning does not make any product usable, saleable or worthy 
of transport, delivery or disposal is rejected – “Manufacturing 
process” has been defined to mean any process for washing 
or cleaning with a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery or 
disposal – The linen deposited with the launderer is, after washing 
and cleaning, delivered to the customer for use – The ingredients 
of the section are fully satisfied – There is nothing in the Act of 
1948, which is repugnant in the subject or context, constraining 
to jettison the definition – Hence, this Court rejects the findings 
of the High Court and hold that the activity carried out which 
on facts is not disputed is clearly covered by the definition of 
“manufacturing process” u/s.2(k) which, in turn, would bring the 
premises in question of the respondent under the definition of 
“factory” u/s.2(m) – If that were so, the complaint lodged against 
the respondent could not have been quashed – The consequence 
would be that the complaint filed by the appellants along with 
the order issuing process of 04.12.2019 would stand restored. 
[Paras 33, 42, 49]
Factories Act, 1948 – ss.2(k), 2(m) – Statutory definitions – 
discussed. [Paras 15- 17]
Factories Act, 1948 – Object and reasons – discussed.  
[Paras 18-20]
Case Law Cited
Balwant Rai Saluja & Anr. v. Air India Ltd. & Ors. [2014] 14 SCR 
1512 : (2014) 9 SCC 407; S.M. Datta v. State of Gujarat & Anr. 
[2001] Supp. 2 SCR 140 : (2001) 7 SCC 659; Works Manager, 
Central Railway Workshop, Jhansi v. Vishwanath & Ors. [1970] 2 
SCR 726 : (1969) 3 SCC 95; Allahabad Bank & Anr. v. All India 
Allahabad Bank Retired Employees Association [2010] 2 SCR 
162 : (2010) 2 SCC 44; Lanco Anpara Power Ltd. v. State of U.P. 
& Ors. [2016] 5 SCR 731 : (2016) 10 SCC 329; Jeewanlal Ltd. 
& Ors. v. Appellate Authority under the Payment of Gratuity Act 
& Ors. [1985] 1 SCR 664 : (1984) 4 SCC 356; Steel Authority 
of India Ltd. & Ors. v. National Union Waterfront Workers & Ors. 
[2001] Supp. 2 SCR 343 : (2001) 7 SCC 1 – relied on.
Crane Betel Nut Powder Works v. Commr. of Customs & Central 
Excise, Tirupathi & Anr. [2007] 4 SCR 109 : (2007) 4 SCC 155; 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
343
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
Kores India Ltd., Chennai v. Commissioner of Central Excise, 
Chennai [2004] Supp. 6 SCR 320 : (2005) 1 SCC 385; Independent 
Sugar Corporation Ltd. v. Girish Sriram Juneja & Ors., 2025 SCC 
OnLine SC 181; Employees’ State Insurance Corporation v. Triplex 
Dry Cleaners and Others (1998) 1 SCC 196; J.P. Lights India v. 
Regional Director E.S.I. Corporation, Bangalore, 2023 SCC OnLine 
SC 1271 – referred to. 
Super Cleaners v. Employees State Insurance Corporation, 2006 
SCC OnLine Bom 1660; Employees’ State Insurance Corporation, 
Jullundur v. Triplex Dry Cleaners and Others (1982) ILR 2P&H 
291 – referred to.
List of Acts
Factories Act, 1948; Goa Factories Rules, 1985; Shops And 
Establishments Act; Employees State Insurance Act; Factories 
Act of 1934; Central Excise Act of 1944. 
List of Keywords
Laundry business; Cleaning and washing of clothes; Dry cleaning; 
Factory; Manufacturing process; Use of premises without factory 
license; Employees State Insurance Corporation; Summons; 
Quashing the process issued; Welfare statute; Beneficial legislation; 
Rule of Plain meaning; Mischief rule.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1060 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 06.09.2021 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay at Goa in SNM No. 944 of 2020
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Ms. Ruchira Gupta, Shishir Deshpande, Ms. Pooja Tripathi,  
Ms. Harshita Sharma, Amit Kumar, Abhishek Verma.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Shivan Desai, Vibhuti Sushant Gupta, Ms. Maria Viegas, Ms. Tahira 
Manezes, Ms. Riya Amonkar, Narender Kumar Verma.
344
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The present Appeal calls in question the correctness of the judgment 
dated 06.09.2021 passed by the High Court of Bombay at Goa in 
Stamp Number Main No. 944 of 2020 (F). By the said judgment, 
the High Court allowed the prayer of the respondent herein and 
quashed the order dated 04.12.2019 passed by the learned 
Judicial Magistrate First Class (JMFC) at Panaji in Criminal Case 
No. LC/19/2019/C. By the said order, the Ld. JMFC had issued 
process to the respondent pursuant to the complaint filed by the 
appellants alleging violation by the respondent of the provisions 
of the Factories Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act of 
1948’) and thereby committing offences punishable under Section 
92 thereof. 
FACTS:-
3.	
The facts lie in a narrow compass. Pursuant to the inspection 
conducted on 20.05.2019 in the premises of the respondent wherein 
the business of Professional Laundry Service was carried on, it was 
found that the respondent did not possess factory approved plans as 
required under Rule 3 of the Goa Factories Rules, 1985 (hereinafter 
referred to as the ‘Rules’) read with Section 6 of the Act of 1948; that 
the premises were being used as a factory without obtaining a valid 
factory licence in violation of Rule 4 of the Rules read with Section 6 
of the Act of 1948 and that the respondent had not submitted any 
application for registration and grant of licence in violation of Rule 6 
of the Rules read with Section 6 of the Act of 1948. An inspection 
report was drawn up and the same was furnished by a covering 
letter dated 24.05.2019 with the “occupier of the respondent” to 
report compliance within 15 days. 
4.	
The inspection report set out that at the time of inspection there 
were more than 9 workers employed; that there was no muster roll 
maintained for the month of May 2019; and that the manufacturing 
process of cleaning and washing of clothes was carried on. The 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
345
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
report set out the details of the machinery/equipments and the total 
installed power and set out that the premises amounted to a factory 
within the purview of Section 2(m)(i) of the Act of 1948 and also 
observed about the violation, as set out hereinabove, with regard 
to the absence of registration and licence for use of the premises 
as factory. The occupier was advised to submit an application for 
due compliance of the Act failing which they were warned that it will 
constitute criminal offence punishable under the Act of 1948. 
5.	
The complaint alleged that by the letter of 30.05.2019 signed by the 
authorized signatory of the respondent a reply was furnished, setting 
out that the respondent who operated under the name and style of 
“White Cloud” is a professionally set up laundry comprising of six 
collection centres around Goa and one central processing unit; that 
it had 58 employees in the collection centres including 10 workers 
at the central processing unit; that a similar inspection had been 
carried out in October 2005 and no further action was taken; that 
under the Act of 1948, washing and dry cleaning would not constitute 
“manufacturing process”; that “laundry business” is a service and 
not a manufacturing activity since the “product” of the business is 
intangible; that what is rendered is a service and that they are duly 
registered under the Shops And Establishments Act.
6.	
The letter also annexed certain judgments to contend that the activity 
did not constitute the “manufacturing process”. It was contended 
that in view of the above there is no contravention of any of the 
legal provisions. 
7.	
It transpires that pursuant to the request of 17.06.2019 by the 
respondent, a personal hearing was also afforded to them and a 
hearing was indeed given by Shri Vivek Marathe, Chief Inspector, 
Inspectorate of Factories and Boilers. The complaint further averred 
that after further correspondence with the respondent since their reply 
was unsatisfactory, the complainant wrote and obtained information 
from the Regional Director, Employees State Insurance Corporation 
(ESIC) that the respondent unit was indeed covered under Section 
2(12) of the Employees State Insurance Act (hereinafter referred to 
as the ‘ESIC Act’) and have ESIC code no. 32000025050000909 
assigned to them. The complaint concluded by stating that since 
no satisfactory reply was forthcoming the respondent was liable for 
offences punishable under Section 92 of the Act of 1948.
346
8.	
On 04.12.2019, the JMFC Panaji issued summons by recording the 
following :-
“Criminal Case No. LC/19/2019/C
Perused. 
The material on record makes out a prima facie case 
against the accused. Hence, issue process.”
9.	
Aggrieved, the respondent herein moved the High Court of Bombay 
at Goa seeking to quash and set aside the summons as well as the 
complaint, primarily on two grounds alleged namely, that the order 
issuing summons is unreasoned and suffers grave errors of facts and 
law and it does not reflect application of mind; and that the process 
of “Dry cleaning of clothes” does not constitute “manufacturing 
process” as defined under the Act of 1948. It was also averred that 
business of laundry is in the nature of service and the premises are 
not manufacturing unit for the purpose of the Act of 1948. 
10.	 By the impugned order, the High Court has quashed the order issuing 
process after holding that a perusal of the order issuing process, 
did not reflect any application of mind, and further relying on certain 
precedents, held as under:-
“22. In view of this position, the definition of manufacturing 
process would show that the washing and cleaning has 
to be with a view to its use, sale, transport delivery or 
disposal. Whenever any washing or cleaning is done of 
any article or substance with a view to its use, that is, 
of use in such a way that a new marketable commodity 
would come into being known commercially for being 
used as such or for selling the same and so on, then 
the process would certainly come within the definition of 
manufacturing process. To constitute or manufacture there 
must be a transformation. Mere labour bestowed on an 
article even if the labour is applied through machinery, will 
not make it a manufacture, unless it has progressed so 
far that transformation ensues and the article becomes 
commercially known as another and different article from 
that as which it begins its existence. Once it is confirmed 
that dry cleaning is not within the definition of manufacturing 
process, Factories Act will not apply.”
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
347
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
11.	 Aggrieved, the appellants are before us in Appeal.
12.	 We have heard Ms. Ruchira Gupta, learned Advocate for the 
appellants and Mr. Shivan Desai, learned counsel for the respondent. 
We have also perused the records including the written submissions 
filed by the parties.
13.	 In the above factual background, the question that arises for 
consideration is, was the High Court justified in quashing the process 
issued?
ANALYSIS:-
14.	 The averments in the complaint allege that the respondent has violated 
the provisions of the Act of 1948 inasmuch as being a factory they 
have not complied with the provisions of the Act of 1948 on matters 
set out hereinabove. This position is disputed by the respondent on 
the ground that their premises do not constitute a factory as defined 
in the Act of 1948. To answer this question, an examination of the 
scheme of the Act of 1948 with particular focus on the definition of 
“factory” under Section 2(m) as well as the definition of “manufacturing 
process” under Section 2(k) is essential. 
STATUTORY DEFINITION:-
15.	 Sections 2(m) and 2(k) of the Act of 1948 read as under.-
“2. Interpretation.—In this Act, unless there is anything 
repugnant in the subject or context,-
(m) “factory” means any premises including the precincts 
thereof—
(i) whereon ten or more workers are working, 
or were working on any day of the preceding 
twelve months, and in any part of which a 
manufacturing process is being carried on with 
the aid of power, or is ordinarily so carried on, or 
(ii) whereon twenty or more workers are working, 
or were working on any day of the preceding 
twelve months, and in any part of which a 
manufacturing process is being carried on without 
the aid of power, or is ordinarily so carried on,—
348
but does not include a mine subject to the 
operation of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952) 
or a mobile unit belonging to the armed forces 
of the Union, a railway running shed or a hotel, 
restaurant or eating place;
(k) “manufacturing process” means any process for—
(i) making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, 
finishing, packing, oiling, washing, cleaning, 
breaking up, demolishing, or otherwise treating 
or adapting any article or substance with a view 
to its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal; or
(ii) pumping oil, water, sewage or any other 
substance; or
(iii) generating, transforming or transmitting 
power; or
(iv) composing types for printing, printing by 
letter press, lithography, photogravure or
other similar process or book binding; or
(v) constructing, reconstructing, repairing, 
refitting, finishing or breaking up ships or 
vessels; or
(vi) preserving or storing any article in cold 
storage;”
(Emphasis supplied)
16.	 A perusal of the definition of “factory” in the Act of 1948 would 
reveal that any premises including the precincts thereof where ten or 
more workers are working and in any part of which a manufacturing 
process is being carried on with the aid of power would be covered 
therein. The Act of 1948 defines “manufacturing process” to mean 
any process for making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, 
packing, oiling, washing, cleaning, breaking up, demolishing, or 
otherwise treating or adapting any article or substance with a view 
to its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal. 
17.	 On a plain reading, it is clear that any process involving washing 
or cleaning any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
349
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
transport, delivery or disposal would be covered within the meaning of 
manufacturing process. The High Court has, on this issue, after relying 
on the judgment of Punjab and Haryana High Court in Employees’ 
State Insurance Corporation, Jullundur Vs. Triplex Dry Cleaners 
and Others, (1982) ILR 2P&H 291 gone on to conclude that the 
use has to be in such a way that a new marketable commodity 
should come into being and it should be known commercially for 
being used as such or for selling the same. According to the High 
Court, only if these ingredients are fulfilled would the definition of 
manufacturing process be attracted. The High Court has further held 
that mere labour bestowed on an article even if the labour is applied 
through machinery will not make it a manufacturing process unless it 
has progressed so far, that a transformation ensues and the article 
becomes commercially known as another and different article from 
that as which it begins its existence. 
OBJECT AND REASONS OF THE ACT OF 1948:-
18.	 To appreciate the correctness of this finding, we need to examine the 
object and purpose of the Act of 1948. The Act of 1948 was enacted 
to regulate the labour employed in the factories. Originally, the Act 
that was in vogue was the Factories Act of 1934. However, as the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act of 1948 indicates the 
experience of working of the 1934 Act revealed the number of defects 
and weaknesses. One of the reasons for enactment of the Act of 
1948 was to reinforce the provisions with regard to safety, welfare and 
health of the workers. It was expressly noticed in the Statement of 
Objects and Reasons that under the 1934 Act, several undertakings 
were excluded from its scope and it was felt that provisions relating 
to health, working hours, holidays, lighting and ventilation ought to 
be extended to all workplaces in view of the unsatisfactory state of 
affairs as was then prevailing in unregulated factories. 
19.	 The defects in the 1934 Act were sought to be remedied by laying 
down clearly in the Bill itself the minimum requirements regarding 
health (cleanliness, ventilation and temperature, dangerous dust 
and fumes, lighting and control of glare, etc.) safety (eye protection, 
control of explosive and inflammable dusts, etc.) and general welfare 
of workers (washing facilities, first-aid, canteens, shelter rooms, 
creches, etc.). The Act provided formulation of Rules by the State 
Government to the effect that every factory should be registered 
350
and should take license for working, which is to be renewed at 
periodic intervals; approval of plans, designs and specifications of 
the proposed construction of factory and so on. The Act of 1948 was 
further amended in 1976 to strengthen the provisions with regard to 
the safety measures to promote the health and welfare of the workers 
employed in factories. A further amendment was made in 1987 for 
dealing with safeguards to be adopted against use and handling of 
hazardous substances by the occupiers of factories and the laying 
down of emergency standards and measures. 
20.	 The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act of 1948 along 
with the amendments are extracted hereinbelow:-
“Statement of Objects and Reasons.- The existing 
law relating to the regulation of labour employed 
in factories in India is embodied in the Factories 
Act, 1934. Experience of the working of the Act has 
revealed a number of defects and weaknesses which 
hamper effective administration. Although the Act has 
been amended in certain respects in a piecemeal fashion 
whenever some particular aspect of labour safety or welfare 
assumed urgent importance, the general framework has 
remained unchanged. The provisions for the safety, health 
and welfare of workers are generally found to be inadequate 
and unsatisfactory and even such protection as is provided 
does not extend to the large mass of workers employed in 
work places not covered by the Act. In view of the large 
and growing industrial activities in the country, a radical 
overhauling of the Factories law is essentially called for 
and cannot be delayed.
The proposed legislation differs materially from the existing 
law in several respects. Some of the important features 
are herein mentioned. Under the definition of “Factory” 
in the Act of 1934, several undertakings are excluded 
from its scope but it is essential that important basic 
provisions relating to health, working hours, holidays 
lighting and ventilation, should be extended to all 
workplaces in view of the unsatisfactory state of 
affairs now prevailing in unregulated factories. Further, 
the present distinction between seasonal and perennial 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
351
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
factories which has little justification has been done away 
with. The minimum age of employment for children has 
been raised from 12 to 13 and their working hours reduced 
from 5 to 4½ with powers to Provincial Governments to 
prescribe even a higher minimum age for employment in 
hazardous undertakings.
The present Act is very general in character and leaves 
too much to the rule making powers of the Provincial 
Governments. While some of them do have rules of 
varying stringency, the position on the whole is not 
quite satisfactory. This defect is sought to be remedied 
by laying down clearly in the Bill itself the minimum 
requirements regarding health (cleanliness, ventilation 
and temperature, dangerous dusts and fumes, lighting 
and control of glare, etc.) safety (eye protection, control 
of explosive and inflammable dusts. etc.), and general 
welfare of workers (washing facilities, first-aid, canteens, 
shelter rooms, creches, etc.) amplified where necessary, 
by rules and regulations to be prescribed by Provincial 
Governments.
Further, the present Act leaves important and complex points 
to the discretion of inspectors placing heavy responsibility 
on them. In view of the specialised, and hazardous nature 
of the processes employed in the factories it is too much 
to expect Inspectors to possess an expert knowledge of 
all these matters. The detailed provisions contained in the 
Bill will go a long way in lightening their burden.
Some difficulties experienced in the administration of the 
Act, especially relating to hours of employment, holidays 
with pay, etc., have been met by making the provisions 
more definite and clearer. The penalty clauses have also 
been simplified. An important provision has also been made 
in the Bill empowering Provincial Governments to require 
that every factory should be registered and should take a 
license for working to be renewed at periodical intervals. 
Provincial Governments are further being empowered to 
require that before a new factory is constructed or any 
extensions are made to an existing one, the plans designs 
352
and specifications of the proposed construction should 
receive their prior approval.
It is expected that the Bill, when enacted into law, will 
considerably advance the condition of workers in factories.
The substantial changes made in the existing law are also 
indicated in the Notes on Clauses [omitted] Opportunity 
has also been taken to arrange the existing law and to 
revise expressions, where necessary.
Statement of Objects and Reasons of Amending Act 
94 of 1976.- The main object of the Factories Act, 1948 is 
to ensure adequate safety measures and to promote the 
health and welfare of the workers employed in factories, 
Government are, therefore, initiating various measures 
from time to time to ensure that adequate standards of 
safety, health and welfare are achieved at all work places. 
In particular, in the context of the need to secure maximum 
production and productivity an appropriate work culture 
conducive to safety, health and happiness of workers has 
to be evolved in the factories.
To achieve these objectives more effectively it has become 
necessary to amend the Factories Act. The amendments 
proposed to be made in the Act by the Bill mainly relate to 
(1) the modification of the definition of the term “worker”, so 
as to include within its meaning contract labour employed 
in any manufacturing process, (2) improvement of the 
provisions in regard to safety and appointment of safety 
officers, (3) reduction of the minimum number of women 
employees, for the purpose of providing creches by 
employers, from fifty to thirty and (4) provisions for inquiry 
in every case of a fatal accident.
Statement of Objects and Reasons of Amending Act 
20 of 1987.-The Factories Act, 1948 provides for the 
health, safety, welfare and other aspects of workers in 
factories. The Act is enforced by the State Governments 
through their Factory Inspectorates. The Act also empowers 
the State Governments to frame rules, so that the local 
conditions prevailing in the State are appropriately reflected 
in the enforcement. The Act was last amended in 1976 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
353
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
for strengthening the provisions relating to safety and 
health at work, extending the scope of the definition of 
“workers”, providing for statutory health surveys, and 
requiring appointment of safety officers in large factories.
2. After the last amendment to the Act, there has been 
substantial modernisation and innovation in the industrial 
field. Several chemical industries have come up which deal 
with hazardous and toxic substances. This has brought 
in its train problems of industrial safety and occupational 
health hazards. It is, therefore, considered necessary 
that the Act may be appropriately amended, among other 
things, to provide specially for the safeguards to be adopted 
against use and handling of hazardous substances by the 
occupiers of factories and the laying down of emergency 
standards and measures. The amendments would also 
include procedures for sitting of hazardous industries to 
ensure that hazardous and polluting industries are not 
set up in areas where they can cause adverse effects on 
the general public. Provision has also been made for the 
workers’ participation in safety management.
3. Opportunity has been availed of to make the punishments 
provided in the Act stricter and certain other amendments 
found necessary in the implementation of the Act
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.”
(Emphasis supplied)
THE ACT OF 1948:-
A STATUTE TO AMELIORATE THE CONDITIONS OF WORKMEN
21.	 This Court dealing with the legislative intent of the Act of 1948 in 
Balwant Rai Saluja & Anr. v. Air India Ltd. & Ors., (2014) 9 SCC 
407 held as under:- 
“28. The 1948 Act is a social legislation and it provides 
for the health, safety, welfare, working hours, leave 
and other benefits for workers employed in factories 
and it also provides for the improvement of working 
conditions within the factory premises. Section 2 of the 
1948 Act is the interpretation clause. Apart from others, 
354
it provides the definition of “worker” under Section 2(l) 
of the 1948 Act, to mean a person employed, directly or 
through any other agency, whether for wages or not, in 
any manufacturing or cleaning process.”
(Emphasis supplied)
22.	 In S.M. Datta v. State of Gujarat & Anr., (2001) 7 SCC 659, this 
Court held as under:- 
“19. … The Factories Act, 1948 cannot but be ascribed 
to be a beneficial piece of legislation and the requirement 
of Section 61, in particular, sub-sections (1) and (2) of 
Section 61 can be easily deciphered since the intent stands 
clear enough to indicate that an adult worker must know 
his daily placement and daily workings beforehand — this 
placement beforehand is the requirement of the statute in 
Section 63 and in the event of non-compliance, there is 
a liability for being prosecuted. We have in the complaint 
a statement that Form 14 does not stand completed. We 
have also in the complaint the number of working hours 
on a day but the requirement of Form 14, the Inspector 
alleges does not stand fulfilled. It is too early at this stage, 
however, to contend that the aforesaid statement does not 
stand to reason and the complaint needs to be quashed 
at this stage of the proceeding.”
(Emphasis supplied)
SOME RELEVANT PROVISIONS FROM THE ACT OF 1948:- 
23.	 A bare perusal of the Act of 1948 would also reveal that Section 
6 provided for the approval, licensing and registration of factories 
in accordance with the Rules made by the State Government, the 
obligation of the occupier to issue notice was provided under Section 
7; the prescription of general duties of the occupier was provided 
under Section 7A; the general duties of manufacturers were provided 
under Section 7B; the provisions for appointment of inspectors were 
made under Section 8 and their powers specified in Section 9.
24.	 Chapter III of the Act of 1948 deals with health and obliges the 
factories premises to be kept clean (Section 11), disposal of wastes 
and effluents (Section 12), ventilation and temperature (Section 13), 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
355
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
regulation of dust and fume (Section 14), artificial humidification 
(Section 15), regulations of overcrowding in rooms (Section 16), 
provision for lighting (Section 17), provision for drinking water (Section 
18) and provision for latrines and urinals (Section 19).
25.	 Chapter IV deals with safety aspects, namely, fencing of machinery 
(Section 21), regulation of work on or near machinery in motion 
(Section 22), provision with regard to employment of young persons 
on dangerous machines (Section 23) and so on. Apart from other 
salient features in Chapter IV, precautions in case of fire (Section 
38), safety of buildings and machinery (Section 40), maintenance of 
buildings Section 40A are provided for. An exclusive Chapter IV-A 
deals with provisions relating to hazardous processes. 
26.	 Chapter V deals with welfare measures for workers; Chapter VI deals 
with working hours of adults and provides for weekly hours (Section 
51), weekly holidays (Section 52), daily hours (Section 54) and night 
shifts (Section 57), extra wages for overtime (Section 59) and so 
on. In the same Chapter, Section 62 provides for maintenance of 
register of adult workers. 
27.	 Chapter VII deals with the employment of young persons; Section 67 
proscribes employment of any child under the age of 14 years from 
working in a factory; Section 71 provides working hours for children 
above the age of 14 years and Section 73 provides for maintaining 
a register of child workers. Chapter VIII deals with annual leave 
with wages. Thereafter, in Chapter X dealing with penalties and 
procedure, general penalty for offences is provided in Section 92, 
which reads as under:-
“92. General penalty for offences.- Save as is otherwise 
expressly provided in this Act and subject to the provisions 
of Section 93, if in, or in respect of, any factory there is 
any contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or 
of any rules made thereunder or of any order in writing 
given thereunder, the occupier and manager of the factory 
shall each be guilty of an offence and punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or 
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both, 
and if the contravention is continued after conviction, with 
a further fine which may extend to one thousand rupees 
for each day on which the contravention is so continued:
356
Provided that where contravention of any of the provisions 
of Chapter IV or any rule made thereunder or under 
Section 87 has resulted in an accident causing death or 
serious bodily injury, the fine shall not be less than twenty-
five thousand rupees in the case of an accident causing 
death, and five thousand rupees in the case of an accident 
causing serious bodily injury.”
28.	 Section 93 deals with liability of owner of premises in certain 
circumstances provided therein. Section 105 provides for cognizance 
of offences and states that no Court shall take cognizance of any 
offence except on complaint by, or with the previous sanction in 
writing of, an inspector and Section 105(2) provides that no Court 
below that of a Presidency Magistrate or of a Magistrate of the first 
class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. 
29.	 The above conspectus of the legal provisions, discussed 
hereinabove, clearly demonstrate that the Act of 1948 is a welfare 
statute aimed at ameliorating the conditions of the workmen 
employed in factories. It is a beneficial legislation intended to 
protect workers from occupational hazards by seeking to impose 
upon owners and occupiers certain obligations for protecting the 
workers and securing their employment in conditions conducive to 
their health and safety. 
APPLICABLE RULES OF INTERPRETATION: -
30.	 Acts of this nature which are social welfare legislation and intended 
to benefit the large community of workers ought to be interpreted in a 
manner to give efficacy to legislative intent. This approach has been 
adopted in catena of judgments by this Court. This Court in Works 
Manager, Central Railway Workshop, Jhansi v. Vishwanath & 
Ors., (1969) 3 SCC 95 held as under:-
“11. The Factories Act was enacted to consolidate 
and amend the law regulating labour in factories. It is 
probably true that all legislation in a welfare State is 
enacted with the object of promoting general welfare; 
but certain types of enactments are more responsive 
to some urgent social demands and also have more 
immediate and visible impact on social vices by 
operating more directly to achieve social reforms The 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
357
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
enactments with which we are concerned, in our view, 
belong to this category and, therefore, demand an 
interpretation liberal enough to achieve the legislative 
purpose, without doing violence to the language. 
The definition of “worker” in the Factories Act, therefore, 
does not seem to us to exclude those employees who 
are entrusted solely with clerical duties, if they otherwise 
fall within the definition of the word “worker”. Keeping in 
view the duties and functions of the respondents as found 
by the learned Additional District Judge, we are unable 
to find anything legally wrong with the view taken by the 
High Court that they fall within the definition of the word 
“worker”. Deletion of the word “whatsoever” on which the 
appellant’s counsel has placed reliance does not seem 
to make much difference because that word was, in our 
view, redundant.”
(Emphasis supplied)
31.	 This Court in Allahabad Bank & Anr. v. All India Allahabad Bank 
Retired Employees Association, (2010) 2 SCC 44 held as under:-
“16. We shall proceed to examine the point urged 
by the learned counsel for the appellant. Remedial 
statutes, in contradistinction to penal statutes, are 
known as welfare, beneficent or social justice oriented 
legislations. Such welfare statutes always receive 
a liberal construction. They are required to be so 
construed so as to secure the relief contemplated by 
the statute. It is well settled and needs no restatement 
at our hands that labour and welfare legislation have 
to be broadly and liberally construed having due 
regard to the directive principles of State policy. The 
Act with which we are concerned for the present is 
undoubtedly one such welfare oriented legislation 
meant to confer certain benefits upon the employees 
working in various establishments in the country.”
(Emphasis supplied)
32.	 In Lanco Anpara Power Ltd. v. State of U.P. & Ors., (2016) 10 
SCC 329, this Court held as under:-
358
“44. The sentiments were echoed in Bombay Anand 
Bhavan Restaurant v. ESI Corpn., (2009) 9 SCC 61, in 
the following words: (SCC p. 66, para 20)
“20. The Employees’ State Insurance Act is 
a beneficial legislation. The main purpose of 
the enactment as the Preamble suggests, is 
to provide for certain benefits to employees 
of a factory in case of sickness, maternity and 
employment injury and to make provision for 
certain other matters in relation thereto. The 
Employees’ State Insurance Act is a social 
security legislation and the canons of interpreting 
a social legislation are different from the canons 
of interpretation of taxation law. The courts must 
not countenance any subterfuge which would 
defeat the provisions of social legislation and 
the courts must even, if necessary, strain the 
language of the Act in order to achieve the 
purpose which the legislature had in placing 
this legislation on the statute book. The Act, 
therefore, must receive a liberal construction 
so as to promote its objects.”
RULE OF ‘PLAIN MEANING’:-
33.	 Reverting to the statutory provisions, it is clear on a plain reading 
of Section 2(k) of the Act of 1948 that ‘washing or cleaning’ of any 
article or substance with a view to its delivery is clearly covered 
by the phrase “manufacturing process”. Where the words of 
statute are clear, the plain meaning has to be given effect. We 
have no doubt in our mind that the business of laundry carried 
on by the respondent involving cleaning and washing of clothes 
including dry cleaning would be squarely covered by the expression 
“manufacturing process”. Admittedly, they employed more than 9 
workers in the centralized processing unit and also used the aid 
of power.
34.	 The plain meaning rule was explained by this Court in Jeewanlal 
Ltd. & Ors. v. Appellate Authority under the Payment of Gratuity 
Act & Ors., (1984) 4 SCC 356, which reads as under:-
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
359
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
“11. In construing a social welfare legislation, the court 
should adopt a beneficent rule of construction; and if a 
section is capable of two constructions, that construction 
should be preferred which fulfils the policy of the Act, and 
is more beneficial to the persons in whose interest the 
Act has been passed. When, however, the language is 
plain and unambiguous, the Court must give effect 
to it whatever may be the consequence, for, in that 
case, the words of the statute speak the intention 
of the Legislature. When the language is explicit, its 
consequences are for the Legislature and not for the 
courts to consider. The argument of inconvenience 
and hardship is a dangerous one and is only 
admissible in construction where the meaning of 
the statute is obscure and there are two methods of 
construction. In their anxiety to advance beneficent 
purpose of legislation, the courts must not yield to the 
temptation of seeking ambiguity when there is none.”
(Emphasis supplied)
APPLICATION OF THE MISCHIEF RULE:-
35.	 To reinforce our holding, we may usefully refer to the definition of 
“manufacturing process” as was defined in the Factories Act of 1934 
under Section 2(g) thereof which reads as follows. 
“2(g) “manufacturing process” means any process- 
(i)	
for making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing 
or packing, or otherwise treating any article or 
substance with a view to its use, sale, transport, 
delivery or disposal, or
(ii)	
for pumping oil, water or sewage, or 
(iii)	 for generating, transforming or transmitting power.”
36.	 It is very clear that Section 2(g) of the 1934 Act did not have the 
words ‘washing, cleaning’ and they have been specifically brought in 
the Act of 1948 with a clear object of bringing into the fold of the Act 
undertakings excluded from the scope of the 1934 Act as discussed 
in the Statement of Objects and Reasons set out hereinabove.
360
37.	 Dealing with the mischief rule, this Court in Steel Authority of India 
Ltd. & Ors. v. National Union Waterfront Workers & Ors., (2001) 
7 SCC 1 held as under:-
“66. For a proper examination of these issues, a reference 
to Section 10 which provides for prohibition of employment 
of contract labour and clauses (b), (c), (e), (g) and (i) 
of Section 2(1) of the CLRA Act which define the terms 
“contract labour”, “contractor”, “establishment”, “principal 
employer” and “workman” respectively will be apposite. To 
interpret these and other relevant provisions of the CLRA 
Act, to which reference will be made presently, we may, 
with advantage, refer to Craies on Statute Law [ 6th Edn., 
by S.G.G. Edgar, p. 96] quoting the following observation 
of Lindley, M.R. in Mayfair Property Co., Re [(1898) 2 Ch 
28, 35 in regard to the rule in Heydon’s case [(1584) 3 
Co Rep 7a : 76 ER 637] :
“In order to properly interpret any statute it is as 
necessary now as it was when Lord Coke reported 
Heydon’s case [(1584) 3 Co Rep 7a : 76 ER 637] to 
consider how the law stood when the statute to be 
construed was passed, what the mischief was for which 
the old law did not provide, and the remedy provided 
by the statute to cure that mischief.”
(Emphasis supplied)
ERROR IN EXTRAPOLATING THE MEANING FROM THE 
CENTRAL EXCISE ACT:-
38.	 The reasoning of the High Court that a transformation has to ensue 
and the new article must come into being and that it should be 
commercially known as another and different article is a totally 
erroneous finding. The High Court has clearly ignored the plain 
language of the Section and has been completely oblivious 
about the welfare nature of the Statute. The High Court has 
extrapolated the definition of “manufacture” as is in vogue in the 
Central Excise Act 1944. Under the Central Excise Act of 1944, 
a statute traceable to the definition of “manufacture” in Section 
2(f) reads as under:
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
361
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
“(f) “manufacture” includes any process—
(i) incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured 
product; 
(ii) which is specified in relation to any goods in the Section 
or Chapter Notes of the Fourth Schedule as amounting 
to manufacture; or 
(iii) which, in relation to the goods specified in the Third 
Schedule, involves packing or repacking of such goods 
in a unit container or labelling or re-labelling of containers 
including the declaration or alteration of retail sale price 
on it or adoption of any other treatment on the goods to 
render the product marketable to the consumer; 
and the word “manufacture” shall be construed accordingly 
and shall include not only a person who employs hired 
labour in the production or manufacture of excisable goods, 
but also any person who engages in their production or 
manufacture on his own account;”
The High Court has been carried away by the interpretation given 
by courts while interpreting the Central Excise Act. 
39.	 Dealing with the features of manufacture under the Central Excise 
Act, 1944, this Court in Crane Betel Nut Powder Works vs. Commr. 
of Customs & Central Excise, Tirupathi & Anr., (2007) 4 SCC 
155 observed as under:-
“31. In our view, the process of manufacture employed 
by the appellant Company did not change the nature of 
the end product, which in the words of the Tribunal, was 
that in the end product the “betel nut remains a betel nut”. 
The said observation of the Tribunal depicts the status of 
the product prior to manufacture and thereafter. In those 
circumstances, the views expressed in  Delhi Cloth & 
General Mills Co. Ltd. [AIR 1963 SC 791 and the passage 
from the American judgment (supra) become meaningful. 
The observation that manufacture implies a change, but 
every change is not manufacture and yet every change of 
an article is the result of treatment, labour and manipulation 
is apposite to the situation at hand. The process involved 
362
in the manufacture of sweetened betel nut pieces does 
not result in the manufacture of a new product as the end 
product continues to retain its original character though 
in a modified form.”
[See also in this Context Kores India Ltd., Chennai v. Commissioner 
of Central Excise, Chennai, (2005) 1 SCC 385 (paras 11 and 12)]
40.	 However, the above judgments under the Central Excise Act can 
have no application since the Act of 1948 defines the expression 
“manufacturing process” which definition is different from the one 
under the Central Excise Act.
41.	 Where a statute under consideration itself defines for the purposes 
of the said Act a certain phrase, a court of law is bound to apply 
the term as defined except in exceptional cases where the opening 
part of a definition, ‘anything repugnant in the subject or context’ 
applies. Recently, this Court in Independent Sugar Corporation 
Ltd. v. Girish Sriram Juneja & Ors., 2025 SCC OnLine SC 181 
held as under:-
“49. Lord Atkinson in Corp. of the City of Victoria v. Bishop 
of Vancouver Island [1921 SCC OnLine PC 75] observed:
“In the construction of statutes, their words must be 
interpreted in their ordinary grammatical sense, unless 
there be something in the context, or in the object of the 
statute, in which they occur, or in the circumstances in which 
they are used, to show that they were used in a special 
sense different from their ordinary grammatical sense.”
50. That words in the statute are to be understood in 
their natural, ordinary and popular sense. This has been 
underscored by Justice Frankfurter, in the following opinion:
“After all legislation when not expressed in technical terms 
is addressed to common run of men and is therefore 
to be understood according to sense of the thing, as 
the ordinary man has a right to rely on ordinary words 
addressed [Wilma E. Addison v. Holly Hill Fruit Products, 
322 US 607 (1944)].”
51. The above pronouncements make it clear that when the 
words used are clear, plain and unambiguous, the courts 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
363
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
are duty-bound to give effect to the meaning emerging out 
of such plain words. The intention of the legislature must 
be gathered from the language used and also, the words 
not used. It becomes imperative to understand those words 
in their natural and ordinary sense, and any interpretation 
requiring for its support addition or substitution or rejection 
of words as meaningless, must ordinarily be avoided.”
ACTIVITY OF THE RESPONDENT – A MANUFACTURING 
PROCESS:-
42.	 The Act of 1948 defines “manufacturing process” and we clearly 
find that “washing, cleaning” and the activities carried out by the 
respondent with a view to its use, delivery or disposal are squarely 
attracted. The contention of the respondent that dry cleaning does 
not make any product usable, saleable or worthy of transport, delivery 
or disposal has only to be stated to be rejected. “Manufacturing 
process” has been defined to mean any process for washing or 
cleaning with a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal. 
The linen deposited with the launderer is, after washing and cleaning, 
delivered to the customer for use. The ingredients of the section 
are fully satisfied. There is nothing in the Act of 1948, which is 
repugnant in the subject or context, constraining us to jettison the 
definition. Hence, we reject the findings of the High Court and hold 
that the activity carried out which on facts is not disputed is clearly 
covered by the definition of “manufacturing process” under Section 
2(k) which, in turn, would bring the premises in question of the 
respondent under the definition of “factory” under Section 2(m). If 
that were so, the complaint lodged against the respondent could not 
have been quashed.
43.	 The High Court has been carried away by the holding of the Punjab 
and Haryana High Court in Triplex Dry Cleaners (Supra). The said 
case has no application for the following reasons: Firstly, that case 
was under the Employees State Insurance Corporation Act, and 
that too before the definition of “manufacturing process” as defined 
in the Act of 1948 was incorporated in the ESIC Act. The definition 
under the ESIC Act prior to 1989 merely defined a “factory” under 
Section 2(12) in the following terms. 
“(12) “factory” means any premises including the precincts 
thereof- 
364
(a) whereon ten or more persons are employed or were 
employed for wages on any day of the preceding twelve 
months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process 
is being carried on with the aid of power or is ordinarily 
so carried on, or 
(b) whereon twenty or more persons are employed or were 
employed for wages on any day of the preceding twelve 
months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process 
is being carried on without the aid of power or is ordinarily 
so carried on. but does not include a mine subject to the 
operation of the Mines Act, 1952 or a railway running shed” 
44.	 It was only with effect from 20.10.1989, Section 2(14AA) was 
introduced in the ESIC Act which reads as under:- 
“(14AA) “manufacturing process” shall have the meaning 
assigned to it in the Factories Act, 1948;”
45.	 Triplex Dry Cleaners (Supra) was decided by a learned Single 
Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Punjab and Haryana on 
22.10.1981 when Section 2(14AA) was not in the statute. This is 
precisely why this Court in Employees’ State Insurance Corporation 
Vs. Triplex Dry Cleaners and Others, (1998) 1 SCC 196 held as 
under in Para 6 while dismissing the appeal of the Employees’ State 
Insurance Corporation. 
“6. We, however, hasten to point out that we are here 
concerned with the show-cause notice dated 21-1-1978. 
At that point of time, Section 2(14-AA) had not been 
inserted in the Act which defines manufacturing process 
as having the same meaning which is assigned to it under 
the Factories Act, 1948. This provision was inserted 
with effect from 20-10-1989. We, therefore, express no 
opinion with regard to the applicability of the Act to an 
establishment engaged in the business of dry cleaning 
after 20-10-1989 inasmuch as Section 2(14-AA) attracts 
the applicability of Section 2(k) of the Factories Act, 
1948 which defines manufacturing process which may 
conceivably include the process of repairing, washing 
or cleaning of any article with a view to its use. However, 
insofar as this appeal is concerned, inasmuch as it relates 
to a period prior to 20-10-1989 when there was no such 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
365
The State of Goa & Anr. v. Namita Tripathi
definition of manufacturing process applicable to the Act, 
it must fail and is accordingly, dismissed. There will be no 
order as to costs.”
(Emphasis supplied)
This present case arises squarely under the Act of 1948 and 
hence with the definition of the Statute in the Act of 1948 clearly 
contemplating ‘washing, cleaning’ there is no scope for applying 
Triplex Dry Cleaners (Supra). Equally the judgment in Super 
Cleaners Vs. Employees State Insurance Corporation, 2006 SCC 
OnLine Bom 1660, will have no application since, it stands similar 
to the situation in Triplex Dry Cleaners (Supra). 
46.	 Recently in J.P. Lights India v. Regional Director E.S.I. Corporation, 
Bangalore, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1271, applying the amended 
Section 2(14 AA), this Court, while dealing with servicing of electrical 
goods, had the following to say. This Court, speaking through Hima 
Kohli J, pithily set out the statement of law as under. 
“7. It is apparent from a perusal of the definition of the 
word “Factory”, as used in the ESI Act that it means 
any premises including precincts wherein ten or more 
persons are employed or were employed on any day of 
the preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a 
manufacturing process was being carried out or ordinarily 
so carried out, with an exception of a mine or a railway 
running shed.
8. Section 2(14AA) of the ESI Act defines the expression 
“manufacturing process” as one, defined under the 
Factories Act, 1948. The said Act defines the expression 
“manufacturing process” under Section 2(k) that is sub-
divided into six sub-heads. For the purposes of the present 
case, Section 2(k)(i) is relevant which makes it clear that a 
“manufacturing process” may include ‘any process amongst 
others for altering or repairing or treating/adapting any 
article for its use or disposal’.
9. In the instant case, the appellant-firm is in the business 
of selling electrical goods in a shop. Admittedly, the shop 
premises is used not only for selling goods, but also to 
service electrical goods. That being the position, it is 
366
clear that the appellant-firm falls under the definition of 
a “Factory” and is using a “manufacturing process”, as 
contemplated under both the Statutes.”
47.	 One additional factor to be noticed in this case is that the respondent 
is registered as a factory under the ESIC Act for the same premises. 
We have, however, not gone by the mere factum of registration but 
have independently arrived at the above conclusion based on the 
interpretation of the provisions of the Act of 1948. 
48.	 The only other argument advanced is that the order issuing process 
is a cryptic order and does not reflect any application of mind. We 
may have been inclined to consider this submission except that in 
view of the categorical findings rendered by us hereinabove any 
exercise of remitting the complaint and asking the Magistrate to 
exercise his powers afresh, would be futile. Hence, we have refrained 
from adopting that course of action. 
49.	 For the reasons set out hereinabove, we allow the appeal and set 
aside the order of the High Court in Stamp Number Main No. 944 
of 2020 (F) dated 06.09.2021. The consequence would be that 
the complaint filed by the appellants along with the order issuing 
process of 04.12.2019 would stand restored to file of the learned 
JMFC, Panaji and shall be proceeded with in accordance with law.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed. 
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan