[2025] 3 S.C.R. 638 : 2025 INSC 330
Jamin & Anr. 
v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1184 of 2025)
06 March 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala* and Manoj Misra, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
(i) Whether the High Court was right in exercising its revisional 
jurisdiction for the purpose of setting aside the order of the Trial 
Court rejecting the second application preferred by the respondent 
no.2 u/s.319 of the CrPC; (ii) Whether the order dated 21.02.2024 
passed by the Trial Court to give effect to the order passed by the 
High Court directing it to reconsider the application u/s.319 of CrPC 
would relate back and replace its earlier order dated 19.07.2010 
rejecting the s.319 application; (iii) Whether the Trial Court could 
have entertained an application filed u/s.319 of the CrPC after the 
conclusion of the trial, more particularly when no stay on trial had 
been granted by the High Court; (iv) Whether the High Court should 
have given an opportunity of hearing to the proposed accused 
before deciding the revision petition filed against the rejection of 
application u/s.319 of the CrPC by the Trial Court. If yes, whether 
the order dated 14.09.2021 passed by the High Court in exercise 
of its revisional jurisdiction was passed without issuing notice to 
the appellants and providing them an opportunity of hearing.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – ss.319, 397, 401 – Whether 
the High Court was right in exercising its revisional jurisdiction 
for the purpose of setting aside the order of the Trial Court 
rejecting the second application preferred by the respondent 
no.2 u/s.319 of the CrPC:
Held: The High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction was 
justified in setting aside the order passed by the Trial Court rejecting 
the second application preferred by respondent no.2 u/s.319 of 
the CrPC as the same was found to have been passed contrary 
* Author
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
639
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
to the settled position of law, suffering from a patent illegality, 
thus, leading to serious miscarriage of justice – Once a superior 
court deems fit to interfere with an order passed by a subordinate 
court, then any rectifications to such order passed in exercise of 
revisional powers u/s.401 r/w. s.397 of the CrPC must be treated 
on the same footing as rectifications made by an appellate court 
and as a result would relate back to the time the original order 
was passed – By virtue of relating back of the order passed by 
the High Court in a revision petition, the summoning order passed 
by the Trial Court in compliance with the order of the High Court 
would also relate back to the initial order rejecting the second 
application u/s.319, and therefore could be said to have been 
passed before the conclusion of the trial – Unlike cases where 
an application u/s.319 is being decided in the first instance by 
the Trial Court, the conclusion of trial will have no bearing on the 
adjudication of an application u/s.319 in terms of the directions 
of the High Court passed in exercise of revisional jurisdiction. 
[Paras 115(a),115(b), 115(c), 115(d)]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.319 – Whether the order 
dated 21.02.2024 passed by the Trial Court to give effect to the 
order passed by the High Court directing it to reconsider the 
application u/s.319 of CrPC would relate back and replace its 
earlier order dated 19.07.2010 rejecting the s.319 application:
Held: The summoning order dated 21.02.2024 was passed by 
the Trial Court in pursuance of the directions issued by the High 
Court vide the revisional order dated 14.09.2021 – Therefore, 
the same should be construed as an extension of the revisional 
order passed by the High Court – The combined effect of the 
revisional order passed by the High Court and the summoning 
order passed by the Trial Court dated 21.02.2024 would be that 
the order of the Trial Court dated 19.07.2010 rejecting the second 
s.319 application stood replaced and substituted by the summoning 
order dated 21.02.2024 – Thus, although the summoning order 
in the present case came to be passed on 21.02.2024, that is, 
after the conclusion of the trial, yet, it would be deemed to have 
been passed on 19.07.2010 by virtue of the law expounded by 
this Court in Maru Ram case and Krishnaji Dattatreya Bapat case. 
[Para 115(f)]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.319 – Whether the Trial 
Court could have entertained an application filed u/s.319 of 
640
Supreme Court Reports
the CrPC after the conclusion of the trial, more particularly 
when no stay on trial had been granted by the High Court:
Held: The High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction 
directed the Trial Court to reconsider the application u/s.319 of 
CrPC – The revisional jurisdiction of the High Court cannot be 
rendered nugatory solely because the trial was not stayed by the 
High Court and stood concluded before the High Court could pass 
the order in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction – Therefore, unlike 
cases where an application u/s.319 is being decided in the first 
instance by the Trial Court, the conclusion of trial will not have a 
bearing on the adjudication of an application u/s.319 in terms of the 
directions of the High Court passed by way of a revisional order. 
[Paras 100, 101]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.319 – Whether the High 
Court should have given an opportunity of hearing to the 
proposed accused before deciding the revision petition filed 
against the rejection of application u/s.319 of the CrPC by the 
Trial Court – If yes, whether the order dated 14.09.2021 passed 
by the High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction was 
passed without issuing notice to the appellants and providing 
them an opportunity of hearing:
Held: s.319 does not contemplate that a summoned person must 
be given an opportunity of being heard before being added as an 
accused to face the trial – A right of hearing would accrue only to 
a person who is already discharged in the very same proceeding 
prior to the commencement of the trial – This is different from 
holding that a person who has been summoned as per s.319 
CrPC has a right of being heard in accordance with the principles 
of natural justice before being added as an accused to be tried 
along with the other accused – However, after the rejection of 
an application u/s.319, a right enures in favour of the proposed 
accused – Thereafter, if in exercise of revisional jurisdiction, the 
High Court is to pass an order which is prejudicial to the benefit 
which had already enured in favour of the proposed accused, 
then the High Court is obligated in law to provide an opportunity 
of hearing to the proposed accused – This is also the mandate as 
contained in sub-section (2) of s.401 of the CrPC – In the instant 
case, a perusal of the order dated 14.09.2021 passed in Revision 
Petition No. 400/2010 clearly indicates that the appellants were 
respondent nos.2 and 4, respectively, before the High Court – 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
641
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
Hence, there is no merit in the submission of the appellants that 
the order rejecting the 2nd application u/s.319 of the CrPC was 
set aside by the High Court without providing any opportunity of 
hearing to them. [Paras 114, 115(g)]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.319 – Object, Purpose 
and Scope:
Held: s.319 has been included in the statute book with the object 
of ensuring effective administration of justice – The legislature 
enacted s.319 to eliminate any situation wherein the courts would 
feel helpless in proceeding against any person who appears to be 
guilty of committing an offence, more particularly, in cases where 
the investigating agency or prosecution files chargesheet only 
against a few persons in relation to an offence and leaves out a 
few others either intentionally or unintentionally – The said section 
empowers the courts to proceed with persons who are not the 
accused before it, upon satisfaction of the conditions prescribed 
in the provision – The intention behind giving a wide interpretation 
to s.319 is to ensure that the perpetrator of a crime does not get 
away unpunished – The legislature incorporated the provision with 
the purpose of empowering the courts to find out the real culprits 
without getting hindered by procedural impediments so that the 
guilty does not go unpunished. [Paras 34, 37]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – Sub-section (1) to s.319 – 
Essential requirements:
Held: A bare perusal of sub-section (1) of s.319 brings out three 
essential requirements that must be fulfilled for invoking the powers 
thereunder: a. First, there must be an ongoing inquiry or trial in 
respect of the original accused person(s); and b. Secondly, in 
the course of such proceedings, evidence must have come on 
record to show that any person other than the original accused 
has committed any offence; and c. Thirdly, the person sought to 
be summoned could be tried together with the original accused 
for such offence. [Para 39]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.319 – Summoning order 
u/s.319 of CrPC – When a person was not chargesheeted by 
the investigating agency:
Held: A summoning order issued u/s.319 of the CrPC cannot be 
quashed only on the ground that even though the proposed accused 
642
Supreme Court Reports
were named in the FIR or complaint, the police did not include 
their names in the chargesheet – In other words, if the evidence 
tendered in the course of any inquiry or trial shows that any person 
not being the accused has committed any offence for which he 
could be tried together with the accused, he can be summoned 
to face trial even though he may not have been chargesheeted 
by the investigating agency or may have been discharged at an 
earlier stage. [Para 44]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – Sub-section (4) of s.319:
Held: Sub-section (4) of s.319 mandates that a fresh trial or a de 
novo trial is to be conducted in respect of the persons summoned 
under sub-section (1) so as to ensure that such persons are not 
deprived of the opportunity to present their case and examine 
the witnesses properly – The requirement of a de novo trial in 
sub-section (4)(a) is quite different from the notion of a split up or 
separate trial as provided u/s.317 of the CrPC – The provision of 
a de novo trial is to safeguard the right of fair trial to be provided 
to the new persons summoned u/s.319(1). [Para 45]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.319 – Stage at which 
power u/s.319 of the CrPC can be exercised – Discussed. 
[Paras 47-60]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.319 – Meaning of the 
expression “could be tried together with the accused” – 
Discussed. [Paras 61-68]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.319 – Mechanism for 
exercise of powers u/s.319 in cases where the trial is over but 
the revisional order relates back to the date of the rejection 
of an application under the said section by the Trial Court:
Held: In cases where the trial is over but the revisional order 
relates back to the date of the rejection of an application under 
the said section by the Trial Court – It is axiomatic that in such a 
case there is no occasion for a joint trial to be conducted with the 
original accused persons – Therefore, when the order of the High 
Court passed in revision after the conclusion of trial relates back to 
the order of the Trial Court passed before the conclusion of trial, it 
must be taken to mean that the new accused would be proceeded 
against in a separate trial – Such a situation shall be governed by 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
643
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
the guidelines provided in Sukhpal Singh Khaira case – There is 
no requirement for a decision by the Trial Court on the question 
of separation of trial in cases like the present one since the trial 
has already concluded in respect of the original accused and the 
only manner in which the order of the High Court can be given 
effect to is by proceeding in a separate trial qua the new accused 
persons. [Para 96]
Case Law Cited
Sukhpal Singh Khaira v. State of Punjab [2022] 10 SCR 156 : 
(2023) 1 SCC 289 – followed.
Municipal Corpn. of Delhi v. Ram Kishan Rohtagi [1983] 1 SCR 
884 : (1983) 1 SCC 1; Kishun Singh v. State of Bihar [1993] 1 SCR 
31 : (1993) 2 SCC 16; Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab [2014] 
2 SCR 1 : (2014) 3 SCC 92; R. Dineshkumar @ Deena v. State 
represented by Inspector of Police & Ors. [2015] 5 SCR 605  : 
(2015) 7 SCC 497; Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander [2012] 7 SCR 
988 : (2012) 9 SCC 460; Maru Ram v. Union of India [1981] 1 
SCR 1196 : (1981) 1 SCC 107; Shankar Ramchandra Abhyankar v. 
Krishnaji Dattatreya Bapat [1970] 1 SCR 322 : (1969) 2 SCC 74; 
Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu v. Motor and General Traders [1975] 3 
SCR 958 : (1975) 1 SCC 770; Uday Mohanlal Acharya v. State of 
Maharashtra [2001] 2 SCR 878 : (2001) 5 SCC 453; Yashodhan 
Singh v. State of U.P. [2023] 10 SCR 1196 : (2023) 9 SCC 108; 
Manharbhai Muljibhai Kakadia v. Shaileshbhai Mohanbhai Patel 
[2012] 8 SCR 1015 : (2012) 10 SCC 517 – relied on. 
Shashikant Singh v. Tarkeshwar Singh & Anr. [2002] 3 SCR 
400 : (2002) 5 SCC 738; Subhash Sahebrao Deshmukh v. 
Satish Atmaraman Talekar & Ors. (2020) 6 SCC 625; Sarojben 
Ashwinkumar Shah v. State of Gujarat [2011] 9 SCR 1138 : (2011) 
13 SCC 316; Devendra Kumar Pal v. State of Uttar Pradesh & 
Anr., 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2487; Raj Kishore Prasad v. State 
of Bihar [1996] Supp. 2 SCR 125 : (1996) 4 SCC 495; Suman v. 
State of Rajasthan (2010) 1 SCC 250; U.J.S. Chopra v. State of 
Bombay [1955] 2 SCR 94 : 1955 SCC OnLine SC 57; Ramesh 
Kumar v. Kesho Ram (1992) Supp. 2 SCC 623 – referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
Law Commission of India, 41st Report.
644
Supreme Court Reports
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898.
List of Keywords
Section 319 of CrPC; Revisional jurisdiction of High Court; 
Expression “could be tried together with the accused; Stage of 
summoning u/s.319 of CrPC; Opportunity of hearing; Stay of trial; 
De novo trial; Right of fair trial; Stay on trial.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1184 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 01.04.2024 of the High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench in A482 no. 2399 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Siddharth Aggarwal, Sr. Adv., Anshuman, Shaantanu Devansh, 
Ms. Rudrali Patil, Ayush Shrivastava.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Shaurya Sahay, Aditya Kumar.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.B. Pardiwala, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the 
following parts: -
INDEX*
A.
FACTUAL MATRIX ...............................................................................
3
B.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS ........................ 11
C.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT ...................... 20
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
645
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
D.
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION .......................................................... 25
E.
ANALYSIS ............................................................................................. 26
(i)	
Legislative history, ingredients and scope of Section 319 
of the CrPC ................................................................................. 26
(ii)	
Stage at which power under Section 319 of the CrPC can 
be exercised ............................................................................... 39
(iii)	
Meaning of the expression “could be tried together with the 
accused” ..................................................................................... 54
(iv)	
Peculiar facts of the present case not fully covered by the 
guidelines issued by this Court in its decisions in Sukhpal 
Singh Khaira and Hardeep Singh ............................................. 59
(v)	
Whether the High Court was right in exercising its revision 
jurisdiction to set aside the order of the Trial Court rejecting 
the second application preferred by the respondent no. 2 
under section 319 of the CrPC? ............................................... 61
(vi)	
The order passed by the High Court in exercise of its revision 
jurisdiction would relate back to and replace the order passed 
by the Trial Court rejecting the application under Section 
319 of the CrPC .......................................................................... 65
(vii)	 Right of the proposed accused to be heard at the stage of 
summoning under Section 319 of CrPC .................................. 87
F.
CONCLUSION ....................................................................................... 93
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High 
Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench dated 01.04.2024 
in Criminal Application No. 2399 of 2024 filed by the appellants 
herein under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(the “CrPC”) by which the High Court rejected the application and 
thereby affirmed the order passed by the Sessions Court summoning 
the appellants herein as accused under Section 319 of the CrPC in 
the Session Trial No. 582 of 2009.
646
Supreme Court Reports
A.	
FACTUAL MATRIX
3.	
On 14.04.2009, the respondent no. 2 herein lodged a First Information 
Report (“FIR”) No. 99/2009 in the Police Station Bilgram, Hardoi, 
Uttar Pradesh for the offence punishable under Sections 147, 148, 
149 and 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to 
as the “IPC”) respectively against five persons namely Irshad, Irfan, 
Abdul, Jamin and Akil in connection with the murder of his brother. 
The FIR alleged that the appellants herein namely, Jamin and Akil 
exhorted the other co-accused to kill the deceased and as a result 
of such instigation, the said co-accused fired at the deceased using 
their pistols resulting into his death.
4.	
On conclusion of the investigation, the police filed chargesheet no. 
07/2009 dated 14.07.2009 against two accused persons, namely 
Irshad and Irfan for the alleged offence. The police by way of Parcha 
No. CD 16 dated 14.07.2009 informed the court concerned that the 
investigation qua the remaining accused persons, namely Abdul, 
Jamin and Akil was ongoing. The chargesheet contained a list of 
18 witnesses which the State proposed to examine in support of 
the charges.
5.	
On 27.10.2009, the Trial Court framed charge for the offence under 
Sections 147, 148, 149 and 302 of the IPC respectively against the 
accused persons who were named in the chargesheet who in turn 
pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
6.	
While the trial against the chargesheeted accused persons namely 
Irshad and Irfan was in progress, the respondent no. 2 filed an 
application under Section 319 of the CrPC praying to summon the 
other three persons named in the FIR to face the trial along with the 
chargesheeted accused persons.
7.	
On 29.01.2010, the Trial Court rejected the aforesaid application on 
the ground that a person could be summoned by the trial court in 
exercise of its powers under Section 319 of the CrPC provided that 
there is cogent and reliable evidence indicating towards the complicity 
of such person in the commission of an offence for which he could 
be tried together with the accused persons already put to trial. The 
Trial Court noted that PW-1 and PW-2 respectively had yet not been 
cross-examined and it was not clear whether the I.O. intended to file 
chargesheet against the persons sought to be summoned, therefore 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
647
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
it declined the prayer to summon under Section 319 of the CrPC. The 
relevant extracts from the said order are reproduced hereinbelow:
“Hence, from the aforesaid principles it is cleared that till 
date, cross examination of Pw-1 & Pw-2 has not been done 
and it is also not cleared that the chargesheet against the 
application by the accused u/s 319 CrPC is being filed or 
not Investigation have been completed or not and if final 
report have been filed then is it pending in Add District 
Court or till now investigation is going on? Whenever it 
would not be cleared and until and unless such evidence 
has not been filed by prosecution that such evidence 
against proposed accused is enough to punished the 
them until then summoned to accused is not justifiable. 
Hence, application not accepted and is deserved to be 
dismissed/rejected.”
8.	
A revision petition bearing no. 203 of 2010 was filed by the respondent 
no. 2 before the High Court against the order of the Trial Court dated 
29.01.2010 referred to above. The High Court vide order dated 
14.05.2010 directed the Trial Court to reconsider the prayer of the 
respondent no. 2 for summoning the proposed accused persons 
under Section 319 of the CrPC after the cross-examination of PW-1 
and PW-2 respectively was over. In the meantime, the evidence 
of PW-1 and PW-2 was recorded on 01.12.2009, 02.04.2010 and 
15.05.2010 respectively. The relevant extracts from the said order 
are reproduced hereinbelow: 
“It appears that the revisionist is the complainant and his 
petition under section 319 CrPC for summoning additional 
accused has been rejected by the court concerned on 
the ground that cross-examination of PW-1 and 2 had 
not taken place.
The learned trial court is expected to consider the 
revisionist’s prayer after the cross-examination is over.
With the aforesaid observation, the revision is finally 
disposed of.”
9.	
Thereafter, on 10.06.2010, the respondent no. 2 filed a second 
application under Section 319 of the CrPC before the Trial Court 
with a prayer to summon the three persons named in the FIR as 
648
Supreme Court Reports
accused in addition to the accused persons named in the chargesheet. 
The Additional District & Sessions Judge, Hardoi vide order dated 
19.07.2010 rejected the said application on the ground that the 
evidence recorded in the course of the trial did not warrant the 
summoning of the said three persons as accused. The Trial Court 
noted that that while exercising jurisdiction under Section 319 of the 
CrPC, it is necessary to see whether there is sufficient and cogent 
evidence to take cognizance and if not, then the persons sought to be 
summoned as accused cannot be asked to face the trial. The Court 
observed that the complainant had no idea as regards the identity 
of the proposed accused persons, namely, Abdul, Jamin and Akil 
and no explanation was forthcoming as to how their names came 
to be included in the FIR.
10.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the respondent no. 2 
preferred revision petition bearing no. 400/2010 before the High 
Court seeking to challenge the order dated 19.07.2010. 
11.	 During the pendency of the revision petition, the Additional District 
& Sessions Judge, Hardoi vide the judgment and order dated 
19.10.2011, held Irshad and Irfan guilty of the offence of murder and 
sentenced them to life imprisonment and fine. The trial accordingly 
stood concluded.
12.	 Long after the conclusion of the trial, the High Court, though aware 
of conclusion of the trial of the co-accused, set aside the order of the 
Trial Court dated 19.07.2010, vide order dated 14.09.2021 passed 
in criminal revision petition no. 400/2010, while observing as under: 
a.	
First, merely on the basis of a statement made by a prosecution 
witness that not a single person in the village was known to 
him, the Trial Court could not have concluded that the proposed 
accused were not present at the scene of the crime; and 
b.	
Secondly, no final report was submitted by the police against 
the proposed accused, exonerating them from the alleged 
crime. The High Court held that a person not named in the 
FIR or if named in the FIR but not chargesheeted, could be 
summoned under Section 319 of the CrPC if the court was 
prima facie satisfied that such person had also committed the 
offence and he could be tried along with the other accused for 
the alleged offence on the basis of the evidence recorded in 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
649
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
the course of inquiry into or trial of an offence. In light of the 
aforesaid observations, the High Court allowed the revision 
petition and directed the Trial Court to reconsider the application 
under Section 319 of the CrPC submitted by the complainant 
(the respondent no. 2 herein) within three months from the 
date of its order. 
The relevant observations made by the High Court are 
reproduced herein below: 
“8 The proposed accused are named in the FIR. 
The plaintiff has been examined as PW-1, he has 
confirmed the statements in his FIR. Just because 
he said that he did not know anyone by name in that 
village, it cannot be assumed that he did not know 
the proposed accused. In the cross-examination he 
was not specifically asked to identify the proposed 
accused, in such a situation it cannot be justified to 
conclude that he did not know the proposed accused. 
It is noteworthy here that the original trial has been 
completed and the accused have been found guilty. 
Annexure-1, submitted along with the supplementary 
affidavit dated 24.11.2020 submitted by the reviewer, 
is reflected in the copy of the decision.
[…]
In the light of the legal principles propounded by the 
Honorable Supreme Court and the above analysis, it 
is clear that the impugned order passed by the trial 
court is erroneous, because on the basis of mere 
statement of PW that he did not know any person in 
the village by name before the incident. Considering 
that he did not even know the proposed accused and 
the investigation against the proposed accused seems 
to be prevalent, neither the final report was given 
against them nor the rejection of the chargesheet 
application cannot be called legal and justified, as a 
result deserves to be set aside.
9 This revision is accepted. The impugned order dated 
19.07.2010 passed by the trial court is set aside. The 
650
Supreme Court Reports
trial court is ordered to again consider the application 
submitted by the plaintiff under Section 319 CrPC in 
the light of all the evidence and well-established legal 
principles and pass an order as per law within three 
months of receiving the copy of the order.”
13.	 On the strength of the order passed by the High Court referred 
to above, the respondent no. 2 filed another application dated 
22.09.2021 under Section 319 of the CrPC before the Additional 
District and Session Judge and prayed to summon the proposed 
accused in the trial. The Additional District and Sessions Judge vide 
order dated 21.02.2024 allowed the said application on the ground 
that the oral evidence of the witnesses recorded by the Trial Court 
clearly revealed the involvement of the proposed accused, viz., 
Abdul, Jamin and Akil along with the accused who stood convicted. 
Since one of the proposed accused namely, Abdul had passed away, 
the court summoned Jamin and Akil to face the trial.
14.	 The appellants being dissatisfied with the summoning order, 
challenged the same by filing an application under Section 482 of 
the CrPC and prayed that the order be quashed and set aside. The 
challenge to the summoning order was essentially on the ground that 
the appellants had been summoned in a trial which stood concluded 
on 19.10.2011 that is, almost 13 years before the summoning order 
was passed.
15.	 The High Court vide the impugned order dated 01.04.2024, rejected 
the aforesaid application of the appellants filed under Section 482 
of the CrPC and thereby affirmed the summoning order passed by 
the Additional District and Sessions Judge. The High Court held 
that Section 319(4) of the CrPC provides that where the court 
proceeds against any person under sub-section (1) of Section 319, 
the proceedings in respect of such person is supposed to commence 
afresh and the witnesses are to be re-heard with respect to the 
proposed accused so summoned. The conclusion of trial against the 
other accused persons would not cause any prejudice to the appellants 
as they would be afforded an opportunity to defend themselves in a 
fresh trial. In view of the aforesaid, the High Court found no illegality 
in the order summoning the appellants herein under Section 319 of 
the CrPC. The relevant observations made by the High Court are 
reproduced hereinbelow:
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
651
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
“27.⁠ ⁠ln the present case, the witnesses PW-1 and PW-2 
have stated about that the previously tried accused had 
shot at the victim at the exhortation of the applicant. The 
trial stands concluded by the judgment and order dated 
19.10.2011 wherein it was held that the accused persons 
Irshad and Irfan created an unlawful assembly with the 
other accused persons and they killed the deceased Arif 
by shooting at him with a firearm. In case the aforesaid 
evidence remains unrebutted, the same would lead to 
conviction of the applicant.
28.⁠ ⁠Therefore, there is no illegality in the order summoning 
the applicant under Section 319 CrPC.
29.⁠ ⁠Section 482 CrPC saves the inherent powers of the High 
Court to make such orders as may be necessary to secure 
the ends of justice. Non-summoning of accused persons 
against whom there was ample evidence warranting their 
trial, would defeat the ends of justice. The order rejecting 
the application under Section 319 CrPC was set aside by 
this Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction and it 
is only thereafter, that the trial Court has summoned the 
applicants under Section 319 CrPC. Any interference with 
the order summoning the applicants to face trial would in 
fact defeat the ends of justice, which would be contrary 
to the object for which the inherent powers of this Court 
are meant to be exercised.
30.⁠ ⁠In view of the foregoing discussion, the application 
filed under Section 482 CrPC lacks merit and the same 
is hereby dismissed.”
B.	
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
16.	 Mr. Siddharth Aggarwal, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for 
the appellants addressed himself on the following questions:
(i)	
Whether the Trial Court could have entertained an application 
filed under Section 319 of the CrPC almost twelve years after 
the conclusion of the main trial and in the absence of any 
proceedings pending before it?
652
Supreme Court Reports
(ii)	
Whether the application under Section 319 of the CrPC dated 
22.09.2021 could have been filed by the respondent no. 2 on 
the strength of the order of the High Court dated 14.09.2021? 
(iii)	 Whether the order dated 14.09.2021 could have been passed 
by the High Court without issuing notice to the appellants?
(iv)	 What is the effect of the conclusion of the trial on the revision 
petition pending before the High Court, more particularly when 
the proceedings of trial were not stayed by the High Court?
(v)	
Whether there was sufficient material on record to summon the 
appellants under Section 319 of the CrPC? 
17.	 As regards the question whether the Trial Court could have entertained 
the application filed under Section 319 of the CrPC after the conclusion 
of the trial, the learned counsel made the following submissions:
a)	
The conditions for the exercise of power by the Trial Court 
under Section 319(1) of the CrPC are:
(i)	
that there must be any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence;
(ii)	
that in course of that inquiry or trial, it must appear from 
the evidence that any person, who is not the accused, 
has committed any offence for which he could be tried 
together with the accused.
If the aforesaid conditions are satisfied, the person sought 
to be summoned can be asked to appear “in the course of 
any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence”. In other words, the 
summoning order should be passed at a stage anterior to the 
date of pronouncement of the judgment, in the trial.
b)	
However, in the present matter, the application under 
Section 319 of the CrPC, which was allowed vide order 
dated 21.02.2024, was made 13 years after the judgment & 
order of conviction of the chargesheeted accused persons. 
Therefore, the Additional Sessions Judge, Hardoi could not 
have exercised its powers under Section 319 of the CrPC as 
he became functus officio with the passing of the order of 
conviction and sentence.
c)	
The High Court failed to take into consideration the law laid 
down by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Singh Khaira v. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
653
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
State of Punjab reported in (2023) 1 SCC 289 wherein it was 
held that the summoning order under Section 319 of the CrPC 
had to be necessarily passed before the order of sentence is 
passed where a finding of conviction was returned. Accordingly, 
the appellants could not have been summoned by the Trial 
Court in 2024, long after the conclusion of the proceedings of 
Sessions Trial No. 582 of 2009 resulting into conviction and 
sentence of life imprisonment being passed against the original 
accused, namely Irshad and Irfan. Therefore, the order dated 
21.02.2024 passed by the Additional District and Sessions 
Judge, Hardoi was not merely a procedural lapse but rather a 
violation of the substantive rights of the appellants.
d)	
The respondent no. 2 also failed to inform the Trial Court about 
the pendency of the Revision Petition no. 400/2010 before the 
High Court and the High Court was also not informed about 
the conclusion of trial qua the chargesheeted accused persons.
e)	
The decision of this Court in Shashikant Singh v. Tarkeshwar 
Singh & Anr. reported in (2002) 5 SCC 738 is distinguishable 
from the present case as having been passed in a very 
different set of facts and thus would not come to the aid of the 
respondents. The facts in Shashikant Singh (supra) were 
that a revision petition was preferred against the order of the 
Trial Court allowing the application under Section 319 of the 
CrPC and summoning the proposed accused. Thereafter, the 
trial came to be concluded during the pendency of the revision 
petition. In Shashikant Singh (supra), the application under 
Section 319 was allowed at a time when the Trial Court still 
had the jurisdiction and therefore, the matter was remanded 
by this Court to the High Court for fresh consideration on 
merits. However, contrary to the facts in Shashikant Singh 
(supra), in the present matter, the Revision Petition no. 400 
of 2010 was preferred by the respondent no. 2 against the 
order of the Trial Court rejecting the application under Section 
319 on merits. Thus, while in Shashikant Singh (supra) the 
summoning order was issued during the pendency of the trial, 
in the present case the summoning order came to be issued 
long after the conclusion of the trial and is, thus, bad in law 
as the Trial Court became functus officio with the conclusion 
of the trial and could not have passed the summoning order.
654
Supreme Court Reports
f)	
Further, this Court in Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab reported 
in (2014) 3 SCC 92 has held that the powers under Section 
319 of the CrPC should be exercised sparingly. The evidence 
on record warranting exercise of this power must be such that 
if it goes unrebutted then it would lead to a conviction. In the 
present case, the appellants were named in the FIR and were 
subjected to investigation and yet were not arrayed as accused 
in the chargesheet dated 14.07.2009.
g)	
The record of the Trial Court indicates that the investigation 
qua the appellants was closed for want of sufficient material 
against them and therefore the investigating officer decided not 
to file chargesheet against the appellants.
h)	
The oral evidence of PW-1 and PW-2, respectively, before the 
Trial Court also failed to inspire any confidence for the purpose 
of summoning the appellants as the testimony of PW-1 was not 
believable. It was pointed out that PW-1 himself had deposed 
that he did not know anyone from the village to which the 
appellants belonged and the testimony of PW-2 by itself could 
not have been relied upon as the respondent no. 2 did not name 
himself as an eye-witness in his complaint or in his statement 
recorded under Section 161 of the CrPC or in his substantive 
evidence before the court.
18.	 As regards the question whether the High Court could have passed 
the order dated 14.09.2021 without issuing notice and granting an 
opportunity of being heard to the appellants, the counsel made the 
following submissions:
a)	
Upon rejection of the application under Section 319 of the 
CrPC dated 10.06.2010 by the Trial Court, the respondent no. 
2 preferred Revision Petition no. 400 of 2010 before the High 
Court. However, contrary to the settled position of law, the 
appellants were not joined as parties to the said revision petition.
b)	
Further, the said revision petition remained pending for 11 years 
before the High Court and in the interregnum, the appellants 
were not heard at any stage. Therefore, the order directing the 
Trial Court to reconsider the application under Section 319 came 
to be passed on 14.09.2021 without affording the appellants 
any opportunity to be heard.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
655
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
c)	
The order dated 14.09.2021 could be said to be contrary to 
the law laid down by this Court in Manharbhai Muljibhai 
Kakadia v. Shaileshbhai Mohanbhai Patel reported in (2012) 
10 SCC 517 and Subhash Sahebrao Deshmukh v. Satish 
Atmaraman Talekar & Ors. reported in (2020) 6 SCC 625 
wherein the right to be heard has been recognised and it was 
held that an opportunity of hearing is to be mandatorily granted 
to a proposed accused in revisional proceedings.
19.	 As regards the question pertaining to the legal effect of the conclusion 
of trial on the revision proceedings pending before the High Court, 
more particularly when the High Court had not stayed the proceedings 
of the trial, the counsel submitted the following:
a)	
Upon conclusion of trial, as a natural corollary, any interim 
proceedings arising therefrom would come to an end as the 
Trial Court becomes functus officio unless a specific stay on 
such trial proceeding has been granted by a higher court. 
b)	
In the present matter, the Trial Court became functus officio on 
19.10.2011 i.e., the date on which it pronounced the judgment 
of conviction and sentence against the original accused persons 
namely, Irshad and Irfan, and was thereafter shorn of the 
jurisdiction to entertain a subsequent application under Section 
319 of the CrPC as no proceedings were pending before it. 
As such, no order for summoning the appellants could have 
been passed by the Trial Court, especially because the High 
Court in its revisional jurisdiction had not passed any order 
for staying the trial proceedings or restraining the Trial Court 
from pronouncing the final judgment against the other accused 
persons during the pendency of the revision petition
c)	
The principle that the Trial Court cannot exercise its powers 
under Section 319 of the CrPC after conclusion of the trial has 
been duly recognized by this Court in its decision in Sukhpal 
Singh Khaira (supra).
20.	 As regards the question whether there was sufficient material on 
record to summon the appellants to face trial, the counsel submitted 
as follows:
a)	
No chargesheet had been filed against the appellants nor was 
any evidence adduced to point towards the involvement of the 
appellants in the alleged offence.
656
Supreme Court Reports
b)	
The application under Section 319 of the CrPC was not preferred 
by the prosecution but by the complainant.
c)	
The Case Diary No. 19 dated 05.09.2009 also recorded that 
action against Abdul, Jamin and Akil was not required as their 
presence at the spot of the crime had not been confirmed.
d)	
The second application under Section 319 of the CrPC dated 
10.06.2010 was rejected by the Trial Court inter alia on the 
ground that upon examination of PW-1, it became evident 
that the complainant did not know the appellants herein and 
no explanation had been offered as to how the complainant 
mentioned their names in the FIR. Further, it was observed 
that investigation against the proposed accused persons was 
ongoing and no final report against them had been submitted 
by the police.
e)	
After due consideration of all the materials and evidence 
collected during investigation, the prosecution arrived at a 
decision that no case was made out against the appellants 
herein and accordingly decided not to file a supplementary 
chargesheet against them. Similarly, after considering the oral 
evidence on record, the Trial Court recorded a finding that no 
prima facie case was made out against the appellants and 
accordingly rejected the application filed under Section 319 of 
the CrPC.
f)	
Even after the filing of the criminal revision petition before 
the High Court against the rejection of the application under 
Section 319, no stay on the trial proceedings was granted by 
the High Court and the respondent no. 2 also did not seek an 
early hearing of the revision petition despite being aware of the 
fact that the trial was about to conclude.
g)	
The impugned order of the High Court also noted that the 
counsel for the complainant did not apprise the Trial Court of 
the pendency of the revision petition. 
C.	
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
21.	 Mr. Shaurya Sahay, the learned counsel appearing for the State 
of Uttar Pradesh, addressed himself primarily on the following two 
aspects:
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
657
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
(i)	
The issue of summoning of proposed accused under Section 
319 of the CrPC after conclusion of trial is well settled in law 
and in light of the said settled position the summoning order 
issued in the present case cannot be said to be erroneous in law.
(ii)	
The impact and purport of Section 319(4) to the extent 
it contemplates re-hearing of the witnesses and fresh 
commencement of trial had been correctly considered by the 
High Court while passing the impugned order.
22.	 As regards the first proposition, the counsel submitted as follows:
a)	
This Court in its decision in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra), inter 
alia, laid down the following guidelines to be followed by a court 
while deciding an application under Section 319 of the CrPC:
i.	
If the competent court finds cogent evidence or if an 
application is made under Section 319 of the CrPC showing 
involvement of any other person in the commission of the 
offence based on evidence recorded at any stage in the 
trial before passing of the order on acquittal or sentence, 
the court shall stop the proceedings of the trial at that 
stage and proceed to decide the application filed under 
Section 319 of the CrPC first before proceeding further 
with the trial.
ii.	
If the court decides to summon an accused under Section 
319 of the CrPC, such summoning order shall be passed 
before proceeding further with the trial in the main case and 
depending upon the stage at which the order is passed, 
the court shall apply its mind to the fact as to whether 
such summoned accused is to be tried along with the 
other accused or separately.
iii.	
If the power under Section 319 of the CrPC is not invoked 
or exercised in the main trial till its conclusion and if there 
is a split-up case, such power can be invoked or exercised 
only if there is evidence to that effect, pointing to the 
involvement of the additional accused to be summoned 
in the split-up (bifurcated trial).
b)	
In the present matter, the High Court in its impugned order has 
recorded that as per Section 319(4), the trial against the accused 
658
Supreme Court Reports
sought to be summoned has to be commenced afresh and the 
witnesses have to be re-heard. Therefore, the conclusion of the 
trial against the original accused persons would not cause any 
prejudice to the appellants. 
c)	
The aforesaid finding of the High Court falls squarely within the 
ambit of paragraphs 41.3 and 41.6 of Sukhpal Singh Khaira 
(supra). The relevant guidelines laid down in Sukhpal Singh 
Khaira (supra) and relied upon by the counsel are reproduced 
below:
“41.3. If the decision of the court is to exercise the 
power under Section 319 CrPC and summon the 
accused, such summoning order shall be passed 
before proceeding further with the trial in the main case.
……….
41.6. If the decision is that the summoned accused 
can be tried separately, on such order being made, 
there will be no impediment for the Court to continue 
and conclude the trial against the accused who were 
being proceeded with.”
d)	
The impugned order also finds sustenance from the decision 
of this Court in Sarojben Ashwinkumar Shah v. State of 
Gujarat reported in (2011) 13 SCC 316 wherein while laying 
down the principles applicable to Section 319 of the CrPC, it 
was held that regard must be had to the constraints imposed by 
sub-Section (4) of Section 319 that the proceedings in respect 
of newly added persons shall be commenced afresh from the 
beginning of the trial.
e)	
The decision of this Court in Devendra Kumar Pal v. State of 
Uttar Pradesh & Anr. reported in 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2487 
has referred to the Constitution Bench judgment in Sukhpal 
Singh Khaira (supra) and held that if a summoning order is 
passed after the passing of order of acquittal in the case of 
acquittal or after the passing of order on sentence in the case 
of conviction, the same may not be sustainable. 
23.	 As regards the impact and purport of Section 319(4) with respect to 
re-hearing of the witnesses and fresh commencement of trial, the 
counsel made the following submissions:
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
659
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
a)	
The High Court in the impugned order has observed that the 
revisional power of the High Court under Sections 397 and 401 
of the CrPC respectively is plenary and there are no limitations 
to reverse an order rejecting the Section 319 application in 
order to ensure that actual perpetrators of the crime are rightly 
brought before the court to face trial.
b)	
The High Court has further recorded in the impugned order that 
merely because the trial against the original accused persons 
stood concluded during the pendency of the revision, the power 
of revision cannot be limited, more particularly when the Trial 
Court had recorded that the murder was committed by the 
original accused due to the exhortation of the persons sought 
to be summoned under Section 319 of the CrPC.
c)	
The principles governing the exercise of jurisdiction under 
Section 319 were laid down by this Court in Hardeep Singh 
(supra) wherein it was observed that it is the duty of the court 
to do justice by punishing the real culprit. 
d)	
As regards the satisfaction of the court before it proceeds 
to exercise its power under Section 319 of the CrPC, the 
Constitution Bench in Hardeep Singh (supra) has held as 
follows:
“105. Power under Section 319 CrPC is a discretionary 
and an extraordinary power. It is to be exercised 
sparingly and only in those cases where the 
circumstances of the case so warrant. It is not to be 
exercised because the Magistrate or the Sessions 
Judge is of the opinion that some other person may 
also be guilty of committing that offence. Only where 
strong and cogent evidence occurs against a person 
from the evidence led before the court that such 
power should be exercised and not in a casual and 
cavalier manner.
106. Thus, we hold that though only a prima facie 
case is to be established from the evidence led before 
the court, not necessarily tested on the anvil of cross-
examination, it requires much stronger evidence than 
mere probability of his complicity. The test that has to 
be applied is one which is more than prima facie case 
660
Supreme Court Reports
as exercised at the time of framing of charge, but short 
of satisfaction to an extent that the evidence, if goes 
unrebutted, would lead to conviction. In the absence 
of such satisfaction, the court should refrain from 
exercising power under Section 319 CrPC. In Section 
319 CrPC the purpose of providing if “it appears from 
the evidence that any person not being the accused 
has committed any offence” is clear from the words 
“for which such person could be tried together with 
the accused”. The words used are not “for which such 
person could be convicted”. There is, therefore, no 
scope for the court acting under Section 319 CrPC 
to form any opinion as to the guilt of the accused.” 
e)	
In the present case, both the Trial Court and High Court 
concurrently held that the summoning of the appellants was 
warranted in view of the evidence that had come on record 
during the course of the trial. The appellants were accused of 
having exhorted the original accused persons and therefore 
prima facie could be said to have abetted the commission of 
the offence of murder.
24.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the counsel appearing for 
the respondent State submitted that the Trial Court was justified 
in summoning the appellants as accused in exercise of its powers 
under Section 319 CrPC. 
D.	
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
25.	 Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and 
having gone through the materials on record, the following questions 
fall for our consideration:
(i)	
Whether the High Court was right in exercising its revisional 
jurisdiction for the purpose of setting aside the order of the 
Trial Court rejecting the second application preferred by the 
respondent no. 2 under section 319 of the CrPC? 
(ii)	
Whether the order dated 21.02.2024 passed by the Trial Court 
to give effect to the order passed by the High Court directing it 
to reconsider the application under Section 319 of CrPC would 
relate back and replace its earlier order dated 19.07.2010 
rejecting the Section 319 application?
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
661
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
(iii)	 Whether the Trial Court could have entertained an application 
filed under Section 319 of the CrPC after the conclusion of the 
trial, more particularly when no stay on trial had been granted 
by the High Court?
(iv)	 Whether the High Court should have given an opportunity of 
hearing to the proposed accused before deciding the revision 
petition filed against the rejection of application under Section 
319 of the CrPC by the Trial Court? If yes, whether the order 
dated 14.09.2021 passed by the High Court in exercise of its 
revisional jurisdiction was passed without issuing notice to the 
appellants and providing them an opportunity of hearing?
E.	
ANALYSIS
(i)	
Legislative history, ingredients and scope of Section 319 
of the CrPC
26.	 Section 319 of the CrPC empowers the court to proceed against 
other persons appearing to be guilty of offence. The section is 
reproduced below:
“319. Power to proceed against other persons appearing 
to be guilty of offence.
(1) Where, in the course of any inquiry into, or trial of, an 
offence, it appears from the evidence that any person not 
being the accused has committed any offence for which 
such person could be tried together with the accused, the 
Court may proceed against such person for the offence 
which he appears to have committed.
(2) Where such person is not attending the Court, he may 
be arrested or summoned, as the circumstances of the 
case may require, for the purpose aforesaid.
(3) Any person attending the Court, although not under 
arrest or upon a summons, may be detained by such Court 
for the purpose of the inquiry into, or trial of, the offence 
which he appears to have committed.
(4) Where the Court proceeds against any person under 
sub-section (1), then
662
Supreme Court Reports
(a) the proceedings in respect of such person shall be 
commenced afresh, and the witnesses re-heard;
(b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), the case may 
proceed as if such person had been an accused person 
when the Court took cognizance of the offence upon which 
the inquiry or trial was commenced.”
27.	 Before the enactment of CrPC in 1973, Section 351 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (hereinafter referred to as “the Code, 
1898”) was the provision corresponding to Section 319 of the CrPC. 
Section 351 of the Code, 1898 is reproduced hereinbelow: 
“351. Detention of offenders attending court.
(1) Any person attending a Criminal Court, although not 
under arrest or upon a summons, may be detained by such 
Court for the purpose of inquiry into or trial of any offence 
of which such Court can take cognizance and which, 
from the evidence, may appear to have been committed, 
and may be proceeded against as though he had been 
arrested or summoned.
(2) When the detention takes place in the course of 
an inquiry under Chapter XVIII or after a trial has been 
begun the proceedings in respect of such person shall be 
commenced afresh, and the witnesses re-heard.”
28.	 A perusal of Section 351 of the Code, 1898 indicates that under 
the old provision the court was empowered to proceed only against 
a person who was attending the Court and who also appeared to 
have committed the offence from the evidence adduced before the 
Court, of which such Court can take cognizance, by detaining such 
a person for the purpose of enquiry or trial. Sub-section (2) provided 
that in respect of such person, the proceedings shall have to be 
commenced afresh and the witnesses re-heard.
29.	 The expression “any offence of which such Court can take cognizance 
and which, from the evidence, may appear to have been committed” 
used in Section 351 clearly indicates two aspects, namely:
a.	
First, that it must appear from the evidence that a person who 
is attending the Court has committed an offence; and 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
663
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
b.	
Secondly, that the offence is such that the Court can take 
cognizance. 
30.	 Therefore, what becomes clear from the aforesaid is that there was 
a lacuna in Section 351 of the Code, 1898 as it did not cover two 
important situations: 
a.	
First, the situation where the person who appears to have 
committed an offence during the course of the enquiry into or 
trial was not attending the Court; and 
b.	
Secondly, the manner in which the cognizance will be taken 
as against that person.
31.	 In order to make Section 351 comprehensive, the Law Commission, 
realizing the above two grey areas, in its 41st report, recommended 
for suitable amendment of the said provision. The relevant 
recommendation of the Law Commission is reproduced hereinbelow:
“24.80. It happens sometimes, though not very often, 
that a Magistrate hearing a case against certain accused 
finds from the evidence that some person, other than 
the accused before him, is also concerned in that very 
offence or in a connected offence. It is only proper that 
a Magistrate should have the power to call and join him 
in the proceedings. Section 351 provides for such 
a situation, but only if that person happens to be 
attending the Court. He can then be detained and 
proceeded against. There is no express provision in 
Section 351 for summoning such a person if he is 
not present in Court. Such a provision would make 
Section 351 fairly comprehensive, and we think it 
proper to expressly provide for that situation.
24.81. Section 351 assumes that the Magistrate 
proceeding under it has the power of taking cognizance 
of the new case. It does not, however, say in what 
manner cognizance is taken by the Magistrate. The 
modes of taking cognizance are mentioned in Section 
190, and are apparently exhaustive. The question is, 
whether against the newly added accused, cognizance 
will be supposed to have been taken on the Magistrate’s 
own information under Section 190(1)(c), or only in 
664
Supreme Court Reports
the manner in which cognizance was first taken of the 
offence against the accused. The question is important, 
because the methods of inquiry and trial in the two 
cases differ. About the true position under the existing 
law, there has been difference of opinion, and we think 
it should be made clear. It seems to us that the main 
purpose of this particular provision is, that the whole 
case against all known suspects should be proceeded 
with expeditiously and convenience requires, that 
cognizance against the newly added accused should 
be taken in the same manner as against the other 
accused We, therefore, propose to recast Section 351 
making it comprehensive and providing that there will 
be no difference in the mode of taking cognizance 
of a new person is added as an accused during the 
proceedings.”
(Emphasis supplied)
32.	 The aforesaid indicates that the Law Commission made two 
recommendations: 
a.	
First, to add an accused who is not before the Court but 
connected with that offence; and 
b.	
Secondly, the mode of taking cognizance as against the newly 
added accused shall be the same as against the other accused.
33.	 Pursuant to the above recommendation, Section 319 was enacted in 
CrPC with suitable modifications. A perusal of Section 319 of CrPC 
makes it manifest that any person, not being the accused before 
the court, who also appears to have committed an offence from the 
evidence adduced before the court during the course of any enquiry 
into or trial of an offence for which cognizance has already been 
taken, regardless of whether such person is attending the court or 
not, can be summoned. If he is added as an accused pursuant to 
the said decision of the court, the mode of taking cognizance in 
respect of such person would the same as in the case of the already 
arraigned accused. In other words, he is deemed to have been an 
accused when the Court originally took cognizance of the offence 
earlier. For this purpose, a legal fiction is created in Clause (b) of 
sub-section (4) of Section 319 of CrPC.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
665
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
34.	 Section 319 has been included in the statute book with the object of 
ensuring effective administration of justice. The legislature enacted 
Section 319 to eliminate any situation wherein the courts would 
feel helpless in proceeding against any person who appears to be 
guilty of committing an offence, more particularly, in cases where the 
investigating agency or prosecution files chargesheet only against 
a few persons in relation to an offence and leaves out a few others 
either intentionally or unintentionally. The said section empowers 
the courts to proceed with persons who are not the accused before 
it, upon satisfaction of the conditions prescribed in the provision. 
35.	 The scope of power under Section 319 CrPC was explained by 
this Court in Municipal Corpn. of Delhi v. Ram Kishan Rohtagi 
reported in (1983) 1 SCC 1 wherein it was held that cognizance 
against a proposed accused can be taken under Section 319 even if 
the proceedings against him have been quashed earlier. The relevant 
observations are reproduced as under:
“19. In these circumstances, therefore, if the prosecution 
can at any stage produce evidence which satisfies the 
court that the other accused or those who have not been 
arrayed as accused against whom proceedings have been 
quashed have also committed the offence the Court can 
take cognizance against them and try them along with the 
other accused. But, we would hasten to add that this 
is really an extraordinary power which is conferred 
on the court and should be used very sparingly and 
only if compelling reasons exist for taking cognizance 
against the other person against whom action has 
not been taken. More than this we would not like to 
say anything further at this stage. We leave the entire 
matter to the discretion of the court concerned so that it 
may act according to law. We would, however, make 
it plain that the mere fact that the proceedings have 
been quashed against Respondents 2 to 5 will not 
prevent the court from exercising its discretion if it 
is fully satisfied that a case for taking cognizance 
against them has been made out on the additional 
evidence led before it.”
(Emphasis supplied)
666
Supreme Court Reports
36.	 Further, this Court, in Kishun Singh v. State of Bihar reported 
in (1993) 2 SCC 16, observed that even a person who has been 
discharged earlier would fall within the sweep of Section 319 of 
the CrPC subject to other requirements for applicability of the 
provision being satisfied. The relevant observations are reproduced 
hereinbelow: 
“11. On a plain reading of sub-section (1) of Section 319 
there can be no doubt that it must appear from the evidence 
tendered in the course of any inquiry or trial that any 
person not being the accused has committed any offence 
for which he could be tried together with the accused. This 
power, it seems clear to us, can be exercised only if it so 
appears from the evidence at the trial and not otherwise. 
Therefore, this sub-section contemplates existence of 
some evidence appearing in the course of trial wherefrom 
the court can prima facie conclude that the person not 
arraigned before it is also involved in the commission of 
the crime for which he can be tried with those already 
named by the police. Even a person who has earlier 
been discharged would fall within the sweep of the 
power conferred by Section 319 of the Code.”
(Emphasis supplied)
37.	 A perusal of the aforesaid decisions of this Court indicates that the 
intention behind giving a wide interpretation to Section 319 is to ensure 
that the perpetrator of a crime does not get away unpunished. The 
legislature incorporated the provision with the purpose of empowering 
the courts to find out the real culprits without getting hindered by 
procedural impediments so that the guilty does not go unpunished. 
38.	 While discussing the spirit underlying Section 319 of the CrPC, this 
Court in Hardeep Singh (supra) observed that the provision is based 
on the doctrine judex damnatur cum nocens absolvitur which means 
that “the Judge is condemned when guilty is acquitted”. The Court 
further observed that this doctrine must be used as a beacon light 
while explaining the ambit and the spirit underlying the enactment 
of Section 319 CrPC. The relevant portions from the said decision 
discussing the spirit of the provision and the approach which the 
courts must adopt while interpreting the provision are reproduced 
hereinbelow: 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
667
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
“8. The constitutional mandate under Articles 20 and 21 
of the Constitution of India provides a protective umbrella 
for the smooth administration of justice making adequate 
provisions to ensure a fair and efficacious trial so that the 
accused does not get prejudiced after the law has been 
put into motion to try him for the offence but at the same 
time also gives equal protection to victims and to society 
at large to ensure that the guilty does not get away from 
the clutches of law. For the empowerment of the courts 
to ensure that the criminal administration of justice 
works properly, the law was appropriately codified and 
modified by the legislature under CrPC indicating as to 
how the courts should proceed in order to ultimately 
find out the truth so that an innocent does not get 
punished but at the same time, the guilty are brought 
to book under the law. It is these ideals as enshrined 
under the Constitution and our laws that have led to 
several decisions, whereby innovating methods and 
progressive tools have been forged to find out the 
real truth and to ensure that the guilty does not go 
unpunished.
9. The presumption of innocence is the general law 
of the land as every man is presumed to be innocent 
unless proven to be guilty. Alternatively, certain statutory 
presumptions in relation to certain class of offences have 
been raised against the accused whereby the presumption 
of guilt prevails till the accused discharges his burden upon 
an onus being cast upon him under the law to prove himself 
to be innocent. These competing theories have been kept 
in mind by the legislature. The entire effort, therefore, is 
not to allow the real perpetrator of an offence to get 
away unpunished. This is also a part of fair trial and 
in our opinion, in order to achieve this very end that 
the legislature thought of incorporating provisions of 
Section 319 CrPC. It is with the said object in mind that 
a constructive and purposive interpretation should be 
adopted that advances the cause of justice and does 
not dilute the intention of the statute conferring powers 
on the court to carry out the abovementioned avowed 
668
Supreme Court Reports
object and purpose to try the person to the satisfaction 
of the court as an accomplice in the commission of 
the offence that is the subject-matter of trial.
--xxx--
12. Section 319 CrPC springs out of the doctrine judex 
damnatur cum nocens absolvitur (Judge is condemned 
when guilty is acquitted) and this doctrine must be 
used as a beacon light while explaining the ambit 
and the spirit underlying the enactment of Section 
319 CrPC.
13. It is the duty of the court to do justice by punishing 
the real culprit. Where the investigating agency for 
any reason does not array one of the real culprits as 
an accused, the court is not powerless in calling the 
said accused to face trial. The question remains under 
what circumstances and at what stage should the court 
exercise its power as contemplated in Section 319 CrPC?”
(Emphasis supplied)
39.	 A bare perusal of sub-section (1) of Section 319 brings out three 
essential requirements that must be fulfilled for invoking the powers 
thereunder: 
a.	
First, there must be an ongoing inquiry or trial in respect of the 
original accused person(s); and 
b.	
Secondly, in the course of such proceedings, evidence must 
have come on record to show that any person other than the 
original accused has committed any offence; and 
c.	
Thirdly, the person sought to be summoned could be tried 
together with the original accused for such offence.
40.	 This Court in Raj Kishore Prasad v. State of Bihar reported in 
(1996) 4 SCC 495 held that Section 319 deals only with a situation 
in which the complicity of the persons sought to be arrayed as 
accused comes to light from the evidence taken and recorded in 
the course of an inquiry or trial. This Court in its decision in Suman 
v. State of Rajasthan reported in (2010) 1 SCC 250 held that a 
case can be proceeded with under Section 319 if, based upon 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
669
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
the evidence brought on record in the course of any inquiry into, 
or trial of an offence, the court is prima facie satisfied that such 
person has committed any offence for which he can be tried with 
other accused. 
41.	 The standard of such prima facie satisfaction to be formed from the 
evidence produced during the course of trial or inquiry has been 
explained by this court in Hardeep Singh (supra). The relevant 
observations from the said decision are reproduced below:
“105. Power under Section 319 CrPC is a discretionary 
and an extraordinary power. It is to be exercised sparingly 
and only in those cases where the circumstances of the 
case so warrant. It is not to be exercised because the 
Magistrate or the Sessions Judge is of the opinion that 
some other person may also be guilty of committing that 
offence. Only where strong and cogent evidence occurs 
against a person from the evidence led before the 
court that such power should be exercised and not 
in a casual and cavalier manner.
106. Thus, we hold that though only a prima facie case 
is to be established from the evidence led before the 
court, not necessarily tested on the anvil of cross-
examination, it requires much stronger evidence than 
mere probability of his complicity. The test that has to 
be applied is one which is more than prima facie case 
as exercised at the time of framing of charge, but short 
of satisfaction to an extent that the evidence, if goes 
unrebutted, would lead to conviction. In the absence of 
such satisfaction, the court should refrain from exercising 
power under Section 319 CrPC. In Section 319 CrPC the 
purpose of providing if “it appears from the evidence that 
any person not being the accused has committed any 
offence” is clear from the words “for which such person 
could be tried together with the accused”. The words 
used are not “for which such person could be convicted”. 
There is, therefore, no scope for the court acting under 
Section 319 CrPC to form any opinion as to the guilt of 
the accused.”
(Emphasis supplied)
670
Supreme Court Reports
42.	 As regards the requirement of evidence and the standard for testing 
such evidence, Hardeep Singh (supra) indicates as follows: 
a.	
First, it is not necessary for the evidence tendered to be tested 
by way of cross-examination for establishing the involvement 
of an additional accused; and 
b.	
Secondly, the threshold for establishing the involvement of an 
additional accused is more than that of a prima facie case as 
exercised at the time of framing of charge, but less than such 
a satisfaction that the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead 
to conviction. 
43.	 Further, the exercise of powers under Section 319 is not inhibited with 
respect to who can be summoned as an accused. This Court in Hardeep 
Singh (supra) has clarified in express terms that Section 319 CrPC 
can be exercised against a person not subjected to investigation, or 
a person placed in Column 2 of the chargesheet and against whom 
cognizance had not been taken, or even a person who has been 
discharged. However, as regards a person who has been discharged, 
no proceedings can be commenced against him directly under Section 
319 CrPC without taking recourse to provisions of Section 300(5) read 
with Section 398 CrPC. Such a person can be proceeded against 
under Section 319 only if during or after an inquiry under Section 
300(5) read with Section 398, there appears to be evidence against 
such person which may indicate that they committed any offence for 
which they could be tried together with the accused.
44.	 Therefore, a summoning order issued under Section 319 of the 
CrPC cannot be quashed only on the ground that even though the 
proposed accused were named in the FIR or complaint, the police 
did not include their names in the chargesheet. In other words, if the 
evidence tendered in the course of any inquiry or trial shows that any 
person not being the accused has committed any offence for which 
he could be tried together with the accused, he can be summoned to 
face trial even though he may not have been chargesheeted by the 
investigating agency or may have been discharged at an earlier stage.
45.	 Sub-section (4) of Section 319 mandates that a fresh trial or a de 
novo trial is to be conducted in respect of the persons summoned 
under sub-section (1) so as to ensure that such persons are not 
deprived of the opportunity to present their case and examine the 
witnesses properly. The requirement of a de novo trial in sub-section 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
671
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
(4)(a) is quite different from the notion of a split-up or separate trial 
as provided under Section 317 of the CrPC. The provision of a de 
novo trial is to safeguard the right of fair trial to be provided to the 
new persons summoned under Section 319(1).
46.	 However, while the provision of de novo or fresh trial under Section 
319(4) is mandatory, the said sub-section is applicable only in cases 
where the court proceeds against any person under sub-section (1). 
Thus, a de novo trial can be commenced in respect of the proposed 
accused only if the power under sub-section (1) has been validly 
exercised by the court. In other words, sub-section (4) is subject 
to sub-section (1) and thus also to the expression “could be tried 
together with the accused” mentioned in sub-section (1).
(ii)	 Stage at which power under Section 319 of the CrPC can 
be exercised 
47.	 The principal contention of the appellants is that the Trial Court could 
not have allowed the application under Section 319 of the CrPC after 
the conclusion of the trial of the original accused. In other words, the 
appellants have contended that once the stage of trial was over by 
virtue of pronouncement of judgment of conviction and sentence, it 
was not open anymore to the Trial Court to issue summons against 
the appellants.
48.	 To better appreciate and address the aforesaid contention of the 
appellants, it is important to understand the stage at which the power 
under Section 319 of the CrPC can be exercised. A bare perusal 
of the sub-section (1) of Section 319 of the CrPC indicates that the 
power thereunder can be exercised “in the course of an inquiry into, 
or trial of, an offence”. 
49.	 A Constitution Bench of this Court in Hardeep Singh (supra) was 
called upon to resolve, inter alia, the issue of the stage at which an 
order under Section 319 could be passed. This Court considered 
the meaning and scope of the words “course”, “inquiry” and “trial” 
appearing in sub-section (1) in detail and inter alia made the following 
observations: 
a.	
The stage of committal can neither be said to fall under the 
meaning of the expression “inquiry” or “trial” and thus the 
powers under Section 319 cannot be exercised at the stage 
of committal of proceedings.
672
Supreme Court Reports
b.	
The stage of trial commences upon the framing of charges.
c.	
Inquiry does not include the stage of investigation by the 
investigating authorities and refers to the stage which 
commences upon the case being brought to the notice of the 
court upon filing of the chargesheet.
d.	
The power under Section 319(1) CrPC can be exercised at any 
time after the charge-sheet is filed and before the pronouncement 
of judgment, except during the stage of Sections 207/208 CrPC, 
committal, etc. which is only a pre-trial stage, intended to put 
the process into motion.
e.	
The application of the provisions of Section 319 CrPC, at the 
stage of inquiry remains limited to adding a person as an 
accused, whose name has been mentioned in Column 2 of the 
charge-sheet or any other person who might be an accomplice.
f.	
The word “course” appearing in sub-section (1) signifies that 
the power under Section 319 can be exercised when either the 
inquiry, or trial, has been commenced and is going on. 
50.	 The relevant observations made by this Court in Hardeep Singh 
(supra) in the context of the stage at which the powers under Section 
319 can be exercised by the courts are reproduced hereinbelow: 
“38. In view of the above, the law can be summarised 
to the effect that as “trial” means determination of 
issues adjudging the guilt or the innocence of a 
person, the person has to be aware of what is the case 
against him and it is only at the stage of framing of 
the charges that the court informs him of the same, 
the “trial” commences only on charges being framed. 
Thus, we do not approve the view taken by the courts 
that in a criminal case, trial commences on cognizance 
being taken.
39. Section 2(g) CrPC and the case laws referred to 
above, therefore, clearly envisage inquiry before the 
actual commencement of the trial, and is an act conducted 
under CrPC by the Magistrate or the court. The word 
“inquiry” is, therefore, not any inquiry relating to the 
investigation of the case by the investigating agency 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
673
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
but is an inquiry after the case is brought to the notice 
of the court on the filing of the charge-sheet. The court 
can thereafter proceed to make inquiries and it is for 
this reason that an inquiry has been given to mean 
something other than the actual trial.
40. Even the word “course” occurring in Section 
319 CrPC, clearly indicates that the power can be 
exercised only during the period when the inquiry has 
been commenced and is going on or the trial which 
has commenced and is going on. It covers the entire 
wide range of the process of the pre-trial and the trial 
stage. The word “course” therefore, allows the court to 
invoke this power to proceed against any person from the 
initial stage of inquiry up to the stage of the conclusion of 
the trial. The court does not become functus officio even if 
cognizance is taken so far as it is looking into the material 
qua any other person who is not an accused. […]
--xxx--
42. To say that powers under Section 319 CrPC can 
be exercised only during trial would be reducing the 
impact of the word “inquiry” by the court. It is a settled 
principle of law that an interpretation which leads to 
the conclusion that a word used by the legislature is 
redundant, should be avoided as the presumption is 
that the legislature has deliberately and consciously 
used the words for carrying out the purpose of the Act. 
The legal maxim a verbis legis non est recedendum 
which means, “from the words of law, there must be 
no departure” has to be kept in mind.
--xxx--
47. Since after the filing of the charge-sheet, the 
court reaches the stage of inquiry and as soon as the 
court frames the charges, the trial commences, and 
therefore, the power under Section 319(1) CrPC can 
be exercised at any time after the charge-sheet is filed 
and before the pronouncement of judgment, except 
during the stage of Sections 207/208 CrPC, committal, 
674
Supreme Court Reports
etc. which is only a pre-trial stage, intended to put the 
process into motion. […]
--xxx--
53. It is thus aptly clear that until and unless the case 
reaches the stage of inquiry or trial by the court, the 
power under Section 319 CrPC cannot be exercised. 
In fact, this proposition does not seem to have been 
disturbed by the Constitution Bench in Dharam Pal 
(CB) [Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana, (2014) 3 SCC 
306 : AIR 2013 SC 3018]. […]
54. In our opinion, the stage of inquiry does not 
contemplate any evidence in its strict legal sense, nor 
could the legislature have contemplated this inasmuch 
as the stage for evidence has not yet arrived. The only 
material that the court has before it is the material 
collected by the prosecution and the court at this 
stage prima facie can apply its mind to find out as to 
whether a person, who can be an accused, has been 
erroneously omitted from being arraigned or has been 
deliberately excluded by the prosecuting agencies. 
This is all the more necessary in order to ensure that 
the investigating and the prosecuting agencies have 
acted fairly in bringing before the court those persons 
who deserve to be tried and to prevent any person 
from being deliberately shielded when they ought 
to have been tried. This is necessary to usher faith 
in the judicial system whereby the court should be 
empowered to exercise such powers even at the stage 
of inquiry and it is for this reason that the legislature 
has consciously used separate terms, namely, inquiry 
or trial in Section 319 CrPC.
55. Accordingly, we hold that the court can exercise 
the power under Section 319 CrPC only after the trial 
proceeds and commences with the recording of the 
evidence and also in exceptional circumstances as 
explained hereinabove.
--xxx--
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
675
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
57. Thus, the application of the provisions of Section 
319 CrPC, at the stage of inquiry is to be understood 
in its correct perspective. The power under Section 
319 CrPC can be exercised only on the basis of 
the evidence adduced before the court during a 
trial. So far as its application during the course of 
inquiry is concerned, it remains limited as referred 
to hereinabove, adding a person as an accused, 
whose name has been mentioned in Column 2 of the 
charge-sheet or any other person who might be an 
accomplice.”
(Emphasis supplied)
51.	 In Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra), a Constitution Bench of this Court 
was called upon to authoritatively consider the stage at which a trial 
could be said to have been concluded for the purposes of Section 319 
of the CrPC. The Court, inter alia, framed the following two questions:
a.	
Whether the trial court has the power under Section 319 CrPC 
for summoning additional accused when the trial with respect 
to other co-accused has ended and the judgment of conviction 
rendered on the same date before pronouncing the summoning 
order?
b.	
Whether the trial court has the power under Section 319 CrPC for 
summoning additional accused when the trial in respect of certain 
other absconding accused (whose presence is subsequently 
secured) is ongoing/pending, having been bifurcated from the 
main trial?
52.	 Answering the first question, the Court observed that where there 
is a judgment of conviction the power under Section 319 CrPC is to 
be invoked and exercised before the pronouncement of the order of 
sentence. In the case of acquittal, the power should be exercised 
before the order of acquittal is pronounced. As regards cases where 
the summoning order and order of conviction/acquittal are passed 
on the same day, the Court held that it will have to be examined on 
the facts and circumstances of each case and if such summoning 
order is found to have been passed either after the order of acquittal 
or imposing sentence in the case of conviction, the same would not 
be sustainable.
676
Supreme Court Reports
53.	 With the regard to the second question, the Court observed that the 
trial court has the power to summon additional accused during the 
proceeding of split-up trial (i.e., trial of the accused which had been 
separated or bifurcated from the main trial), subject to the evidence 
recorded in the split-up (bifurcated) trial pointing to the involvement 
of the accused sought to be summoned. The Court clarified that the 
evidence recorded in the main concluded trial cannot be the basis 
of the summoning order if such power has not been exercised in 
the main trial till its conclusion.
54.	 The Court also approved its earlier decision in Shashikant Singh 
(supra) wherein it was held that the expression “could be tried 
together with the accused” used in Section 319 does not mandate 
that the proposed accused has to be jointly tried with the original 
accused. It was held by this Court that at the time of deciding to 
proceed against the proposed accused under Section 319, the court 
is also required to apply its mind and take a decision as to whether 
the proceedings shall continue jointly with the original accused or 
separately for the proposed accused. 
55.	 The relevant portions from the reasoning assigned by the Court in 
arriving at the aforesaid conclusions are reproduced hereinbelow: 
“23. […] Therefore, it would be open for the court to 
summon such a person so that he could be tried together 
with the accused and such power is exclusively of the 
court. Obviously, when such power is to summon 
the additional accused and try such a person with 
the already charged accused against whom the trial 
is proceeding, it will have to be exercised before 
the conclusion of trial. The connotation “conclusion 
of trial” in the present case cannot be reckoned as 
the stage till the evidence is recorded, but, is to be 
understood as the stage before pronouncement of the 
judgment as already held in Hardeep Singh [Hardeep 
Singh v. State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC 92 : (2014) 2 
SCC (Cri) 86] since on judgment being pronounced 
the trial comes to a conclusion since until such time 
the accused is being tried by the court.
--xxx--
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
677
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
27. From a perusal of the provisions extracted above, 
it is seen that if the Sessions Court while analysing the 
evidence recorded finds that there is no evidence to hold 
the accused for having committed the offence, the Judge 
is required to record an order of acquittal. In that case, 
there is nothing further to be done by the learned Judge 
and therefore the trial concludes at that stage. In such 
cases where it arises under Section 232 CrPC and 
an order of acquittal is recorded and when there are 
more than one accused or the sole accused, have/
has been acquitted, in such cases, that being the end 
of the trial by drawing the curtain, the power of the 
court to summon an accused based on the evidence 
as contemplated under Section 319 CrPC will have to 
be invoked and exercised before pronouncement of 
judgment of acquittal. There shall be application of 
mind also, as to whether separate trial or joint trial is 
to be held while trying him afresh. After such order it 
will be open to pronounce the judgment of acquittal 
of the accused who was tried earlier.
--xxx--
29. The above aspects would indicate that even after 
the pronouncement of the judgment of conviction, 
the trial is not complete since the learned Sessions 
Judge is required to apply her/his mind to the 
evidence which is available on record to determine 
the gravity of the charge for which the accused is 
found guilty; the role of the particular accused when 
there is more than one accused involved in an offence 
and in that light, to award an appropriate sentence. 
Therefore, it cannot be said that the trial is complete 
on the pronouncement of the judgment of conviction 
alone, though it may be so in the case of acquittal 
as contemplated under Section 232 CrPC, since in 
that case there is nothing further to be done by the 
learned Judge except to record an order of acquittal 
which results in conclusion of trial.
--xxx--
678
Supreme Court Reports
32. Therefore, from a perusal of the provisions and 
decisions of this Court, it is clear that the conclusion 
of the trial in a criminal prosecution if it ends in 
conviction, a judgment is considered to be complete 
in all respects only when the sentence is imposed 
on the convict, if the convict is not given the benefit 
of Section 360 CrPC. Similarly, in a case where there 
are more than one accused and if one or more among 
them are acquitted and the others are convicted, the trial 
would stand concluded as against the accused who are 
acquitted and the trial will have to be concluded against 
the convicted accused with the imposition of sentence. 
When considered in the context of Section 319 CrPC, 
there would be no dichotomy as argued, since what 
becomes relevant here is only the decision to summon a 
new accused based on the evidence available on record 
which would not prejudice the existing accused since in 
any event they are convicted.
--xxx--
34. Though Section 319 CrPC provides that such 
person summoned as per sub-section (1) thereto 
could be jointly tried together with the other accused, 
keeping in view the power available to the court under 
Section 223 CrPC to hold a joint trial, it would also be 
open to the learned Sessions Judge at the point of 
considering the application under Section 319 CrPC 
and deciding to summon the additional accused, to 
also take a decision as to whether a joint trial is to 
be held after summoning such accused by deferring 
the judgment being passed against the tried accused. 
If a conclusion is reached that the fresh trial to be 
conducted against the newly added accused could 
be separately tried, in such event it would be open 
for the learned Sessions Judge to order so and 
proceed to pass the judgment and conclude the trial 
insofar as the accused against whom it had originally 
proceeded and thereafter proceed in the case of the 
newly added accused. However, what is important is 
that the decision to summon an additional accused 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
679
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
either suo motu by the court or on an application 
under Section 319 CrPC shall in all eventuality be 
considered and disposed of before the judgment of 
conviction and sentence is pronounced, as otherwise, 
the trial would get concluded and the court will get 
divested of the power under Section 319 CrPC. Since 
a power is available to the court to decide as to whether 
a joint trial is required to be held or not, this Court was 
justified in holding the phrase, “could be tried together with 
the accused” as contained in Section 319(1)CrPC, to be 
directory as held in Shashikant Singh [Shashikant Singh v. 
Tarkeshwar Singh, (2002) 5 SCC 738 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 
1203] which in our opinion is the correct view.
35. One other aspect which is necessary to be clarified 
is that if the trial against the absconding accused 
is split up (bifurcated) and is pending, that by itself 
will not provide validity to an application filed under 
Section 319CrPC or the order of court to summon 
an additional accused in the earlier main trial if such 
summoning order is made in the earlier concluded trial 
against the other accused. This is so, since such power 
is to be exercised by the court based on the evidence 
recorded in that case pointing to the involvement of the 
accused who is sought to be summoned. If in the split 
up (bifurcated) case, on securing the presence of 
the absconding accused the trial is commenced and 
if in the evidence recorded therein it points to the 
involvement of any other person as contemplated in 
Section 319CrPC, such power to summon the accused 
can certainly be invoked in the split up (bifurcated) 
case before conclusion of the trial therein.”
(Emphasis supplied)
56.	 Further, this Court in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra) also laid down 
certain guidelines for the exercise of power by the courts under 
Section 319 of the CrPC. These guidelines are reproduced below:
“41.(III) What are the guidelines that the competent 
court must follow while exercising power under Section 
319CrPC?
680
Supreme Court Reports
41.1. If the competent court finds evidence or if application 
under Section 319 CrPC is filed regarding involvement 
of any other person in committing the offence based on 
evidence recorded at any stage in the trial before passing 
of the order on acquittal or sentence, it shall pause the 
trial at that stage.
41.2. The court shall thereupon first decide the need or 
otherwise to summon the additional accused and pass 
orders thereon.
41.3. If the decision of the court is to exercise the 
power under Section 319 CrPC and summon the 
accused, such summoning order shall be passed 
before proceeding further with the trial in the main 
case.
41.4. If the summoning order of additional accused is 
passed, depending on the stage at which it is passed, 
the court shall also apply its mind to the fact as to 
whether such summoned accused is to be tried along 
with the other accused or separately.
41.5. If the decision is for joint trial, the fresh trial shall 
be commenced only after securing the presence of the 
summoned accused.
41.6. If the decision is that the summoned accused can be 
tried separately, on such order being made, there will be 
no impediment for the court to continue and conclude the 
trial against the accused who were being proceeded with.
41.7. If the proceeding paused as in para 41.1 above, is 
in a case where the accused who were tried are to be 
acquitted, and the decision is that the summoned accused 
can be tried afresh separately, there will be no impediment 
to pass the judgment of acquittal in the main case.
41.8. If the power is not invoked or exercised in the 
main trial till its conclusion and if there is a split-up 
(bifurcated) case, the power under Section 319 CrPC 
can be invoked or exercised only if there is evidence 
to that effect, pointing to the involvement of the 
additional accused to be summoned in the split-up 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
681
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
(bifurcated) trial.
41.9. If, after arguments are heard and the case is reserved 
for judgment the occasion arises for the Court to invoke 
and exercise the power under Section 319 CrPC, the 
appropriate course for the court is to set it down for re-
hearing.
41.10. On setting it down for re-hearing, the above laid 
down procedure to decide about summoning; holding of 
joint trial or otherwise shall be decided and proceeded 
with accordingly.
41.11. Even in such a case, at that stage, if the decision 
is to summon additional accused and hold a joint trial the 
trial shall be conducted afresh and de novo proceedings 
be held.
41.12. If, in that circumstance, the decision is to hold 
a separate trial in case of the summoned accused as 
indicated earlier:
(a) The main case may be decided by pronouncing 
the conviction and sentence and then proceed 
afresh against summoned accused.
(b) In the case of acquittal the order shall be passed 
to that effect in the main case and then proceed 
afresh against summoned accused.”
(Emphasis supplied)
57.	 The guidelines laid down by this Court contemplate several situations 
as to how the trial of the accused summoned under Section 319 
should take place. Paragraph nos. 41.1 to 41.4 lay down the 
chronology of steps to be taken while deciding an application under 
Section 319 that is:
a.	
First, the court has to decide the need for summoning an 
accused under Section 319;
b.	
Secondly, if the court reaches the conclusion that a person is 
required to be arrayed as an accused under Section 319, then 
the summoning order in respect thereof must be passed before 
the conclusion of the trial of the original accused; 
682
Supreme Court Reports
c.	
Thirdly, depending on the stage of the trial at which the 
summoning order under Section 319 is passed, the court also 
has to decide whether the newly arrayed accused will be jointly 
or separately tried with the original accused. 
58.	 Paragraph 41.8 of the guidelines clarifies that the power under 
Section 319 can be invoked only during the pendency of trial of the 
original accused person(s). To illustrate, say in a case with accused 
‘A’ and accused ‘B’ the trial was split-up by the court in respect of 
accused ‘B’ because he was found to be absconding, then the main 
trial in respect of the accused ‘A’ can continue separately without 
any hindrance or delay. In a situation where the main trial in respect 
of accused ‘A’ has already concluded and only the split-up trial in 
respect of accused ‘B’ remains pending, the power under Section 
319 can be invoked even in such split-up proceedings provided 
that it appears from the evidence recorded in such split-up trial 
proceedings that a person not being the accused has committed 
any offence which could be tried together with accused ‘B’ whose 
culpability is being adjudicated in the split-up trial. It is apposite to 
mention here that if the evidence recorded during the course of the 
main trial in respect of accused ‘A’ indicates towards the complicity of 
an additional accused person, but the same has already concluded, 
then, by using such evidence, the power under Section 319 cannot 
be invoked during the split-up trial in respect of accused ‘B’. For a 
person to be summoned under Section 319 in the split-up trial, the 
condition precedent is that the evidence taken in the split-up trial 
by itself should indicate towards the involvement of the proposed 
accused in the offence.
59.	 Further, it is clear from Paragraph nos. 41.5, 41.6, 41.7, 41.9, 41.10, 
41.11 and 41.12, respectively, that a de novo or a fresh trial is 
mandatory upon summoning of an accused person under Section 
319. If upon such summoning, the court decides to conduct a joint 
trial of the proposed accused with the original accused, then the 
trial will be conducted afresh for the newly arrayed accused. On the 
other hand, if the decision of the court is to conduct a separate trial 
for the newly arrayed accused, then the main trial in respect of the 
original accused can be concluded without any impediment and the 
fresh trial of the new accused persons can be conducted separately.
60.	 Therefore, conducting a fresh trial in respect of the proposed 
accused after the conclusion of the main trial is not permissible 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
683
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
unless an order separating the trial of the original accused with that 
of the proposed accused is passed by the court before the original 
trial stands concluded. This stage is reached after the summoning 
order has been made during the pendency of the trial in respect of 
the original accused. From the above exposition of law, it is clear 
that passing of a summoning order before the conclusion of trial 
is a requirement that flows from sub-section (1) of Section 319. 
This requirement is in no way qualified by the provision of a fresh 
trial under sub-section (4) and thus, cannot be the basis to allow a 
summoning order to be passed after the conclusion of trial in the 
absence of a decision by the court to proceed against the proposed 
accused under sub-section (1) of Section 319 of the CrPC during 
the pendency of the trial.
(iii)	 Meaning of the expression “could be tried together with 
the accused”
61.	 In our considered view, the expression “could be tried together with 
the accused” lays down a necessary requirement that the persons 
sought to be arrayed as accused under Section 319 should be 
capable of being jointly tried with the original accused irrespective 
of whether they are actually tried together or not. This Court in its 
decision in R. Dineshkumar @ Deena v. State represented by 
Inspector of Police & Ors. reported in (2015) 7 SCC 497 observed 
that the expression “could be tried together” as appearing in Section 
319 of the CrPC is to be construed in the context of Section 223 of 
the CrPC which provides for circumstances under which different 
persons may be tried together. The relevant observations are 
reproduced below:
“8. […] The section authorises the court making any inquiry 
into or conducting the trial of an offence to “proceed” 
against any person (other than the accused facing trial) 
subject to two conditions (i) that from the “evidence” it 
appears to the court that such a person “has committed 
any offence”, and (ii) that such a person “could be tried 
together with the accused”.
9. We shall first consider the question as to when could a 
person appearing to have committed an offence “be tried 
together with the accused” already facing trial?
684
Supreme Court Reports
10. Section 223 CrPC provides for the joint trial 
of different accused in certain circumstances. It 
enumerates different contingencies in which different 
persons may be charged and tried together. As rightly 
noticed by the High Court, the only clause if at all relevant 
for the purpose of the present case is Section 223(d) 
which stipulates that persons accused of different offences 
committed in the course of the same transaction could be 
charged and tried together.”
(Emphasis supplied)
62.	 Section 223 of the CrPC provides for certain situations and 
contingencies in which different persons may be charged and tried 
together. This Court in R. Dineshkumar (supra) had the occasion to 
consider the meaning of the expression “same transaction” and held 
that joint trial of persons accused of different offences committed 
in the course of same transaction is permissible under Section 319 
where the offences are not wholly unconnected. 
63.	 What is discernible from the principles expounded in R. Dineshkumar 
(supra) is that for offences committed in the same transaction, the 
court should ideally arraign all the concerned persons as accused at 
the same time. Even if a person is not arraigned as an accused, he 
could be arraigned as an accused under Section 319 provided, inter 
alia, he “could be tried together” with the originally chargesheeted 
accused. Therefore, what follows is that a person must be arraigned 
as an accused under Section 319 when the persons originally 
chargesheeted are still accused persons and their culpability is yet 
to be decided. 
64.	 The power under Section 319 can only be exercised in a situation 
where the Trial Court is seized of the offence committed in the “same 
transaction”. When the trial is concluded, such court becomes functus 
officio and the power to summon persons under Section 319 for the 
offences alleged to have been committed in the same transaction 
no longer vests with the said court as the new persons sought to 
be summoned cannot be tried together with the original accused. 
65.	 While it is mandatory for the court to arrive at an objective satisfaction, 
on the basis of the evidence adduced in the course of inquiry or trial, 
that the proposed accused appears to have committed an offence, 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
685
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
the court is also duty bound in law to ascertain whether the proposed 
accused could be tried with the original accused for the commission 
of the offence which he appears to have committed. Undoubtedly, it 
is open for the court to take a decision as to whether it wishes to try 
the proposed accused jointly with the original accused or proceed 
against him in a separate trial, however, the stage for exercise of such 
a discretion can only arise if the aforesaid two obligatory conditions 
are satisfied. By implication, both the aforesaid conditions can only 
be satisfied if the court proceeds against the proposed accused 
before the conclusion of the trial as with the conclusion of trial the 
possibility of fulfilment of the twin conditions of “in the course of trial” 
and “could be tried together” ceases to exist.
66.	 We may clarify with a view to obviate any confusion that the 
requirement placed by the expression “could be tried together with the 
accused” for exercise of power under sub-section (1) of Section 319 
is mandatory in the sense that a joint trial of the original accused and 
proposed accused must be possible. However, whether a joint trial, 
or a separate trial, is held is left to the discretion of the Trial Court. 
As a result, passing of the summoning order before the conclusion 
of trial is mandatory. It cannot be said for a moment that passing 
of the summoning order before the conclusion of trial is directory 
merely because sub-section (4) provides for conduct of a fresh trial 
in respect of the additional accused.
67.	 This Court in its decisions in Shashikant Singh (supra) and Sukhpal 
Singh Khaira (supra) has clarified that the expression “could be” 
tried together with the accused is only directory i.e., an expression 
of possibility and should not be construed to mean “must be”. The 
dictum laid in the aforesaid cases is that conclusion of the trial qua 
the original accused would not act as an impediment for the court to 
proceed with the trial of the proposed accused who were summoned 
under Section 319 of the CrPC before the conclusion of the original 
trial. In other words, if a summoning order under Section 319 of the 
CrPC is passed against the proposed accused during the pendency 
of the trial in respect of the original accused, then even if such trial 
concludes before the court is able to proceed with the proposed 
accused, that would not prevent the court from proceeding in a 
separate trial against the proposed accused. 
68.	 Thus, what has been emphasised by this Court in the aforesaid 
decisions is that if the Trial Court, after applying its mind as regards 
686
Supreme Court Reports
the fulfilment of the twin conditions under sub-section (1) of Section 
319, decides to summon the proposed accused for facing trial, then 
the mere fact that the main trial stands concluded during the pendency 
of a revision petition against the summoning order before the High 
Court, would not incapacitate the Trial Court from proceeding with 
the summoned proposed accused in a separate trial even after 
conclusion of the main trial. In other words, the summoning order 
would not become ineffective and inoperative so as to nullify the 
opinion earlier formed by the court on the basis of evidence before it 
that the newly added person appears to have committed the offence 
if the trial against the additional accused does not commence before 
the conclusion of the main trial in respect of the original accused. 
The expression “could be tried together with the accused” does not 
fetter the power of the Trial Court under Section 319 to conduct 
trial of the proposed accused persons even after the conclusion of 
the main trial provided the summoning order is passed before such 
conclusion. It is in this context that this Court stated that the said 
expression is to be construed as directory and not mandatory.
(iv)	 Peculiar facts of the present case not fully covered by the 
guidelines issued by this Court in its decisions in Sukhpal 
Singh Khaira and Hardeep Singh 
69.	 The dictum that flows from the aforesaid discussion is that the power 
under Section 319 of the CrPC must be exercised by the court against 
the proposed accused before the conclusion of the trial in respect 
of the original accused. However, the factual matrix of the case at 
hand is one of its kind and requires us to take a step forward into a 
territory which this Court has not had the occasion to tread in any 
of its earlier decisions including those in Sukhpal Singh Khaira 
(supra), Hardeep Singh (supra) and Shashikant Singh (supra) all 
of which have been discussed in detail by us. 
70.	 The facts in the present case compared to those in Shashikant 
Singh (supra) are distinguishable to the extent that the summoning 
order in the latter case was passed before the conclusion of trial 
and the same was overturned by the High Court in exercise of its 
revisional powers on the sole ground that the trial in respect of the 
original accused had concluded during the pendency of the revision. 
However, this Court gave a purposive interpretation to Section 319 
and set aside the order of the High Court and remanded the matter 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
687
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
back for a fresh consideration. The decision in Shashikant Singh 
(supra) was later approved by the Constitution Bench in Sukhpal 
Singh Khaira (supra) as the summoning order in Shashikant Singh 
(supra) was passed by the Trial Court before the conclusion of the trial. 
71.	 In Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra), the question to be decided was 
limited to the extent whether the summoning order could have been 
passed by the Trial Court after the passing of the order of conviction 
and sentence. 
72.	 The peculiarity of the present case lies in the fact that although 
the application under Section 319 of the CrPC was rejected before 
the conclusion of the trial, the same came to be allowed after the 
conclusion of the trial, and the case was remanded by the High 
Court for a fresh consideration due to a patent illegality in the order 
of rejection passed by the Trial Court. 
73.	 The facts in detail are that the Trial Court had rejected the second 
application filed under Section 319 by the respondent no. 2 whilst 
the trial was pending. The respondent no. 2 preferred a revision 
before the High Court against the rejection of his application. This 
rejection order came to be set aside by the High Court subsequent 
to the conclusion of the trial by the Sessions Court. The High Court 
directed the Trial Court to consider the application afresh and in 
compliance with the same, the respondent no. 2, though not required 
as per the High Court’s order, moved a third application under 
Section 319 of the CrPC almost 10 years after the conclusion of 
trial. The 3rd application under Section 319 of the CrPC came to be 
allowed by the Sessions Court and challenge to the same by the 
appellants under Section 482 of the CrPC came to be rejected vide 
the impugned order passed by the High Court.
74.	 The fundamental difference between the case at hand and 
Shashikant Singh (supra) is that although the application under 
Section 319 was considered by the Trial Court before the conclusion 
of the trial, yet the summoning order could not be passed before the 
conclusion of trial as the trial stood concluded during the pendency 
of the revision petition before the High Court. Thus, what falls for our 
consideration is the legal effect of the order of the High Court setting 
aside the rejection of the second application by the Trial Court long 
after the conclusion of the trial. More particularly, what needs to be 
determined is the interplay between power of courts under Section 
688
Supreme Court Reports
319 vis-à-vis the revisional power of the High Court under Sections 
397 to 401 of the CrPC.
(v)	 Whether the High Court was right in exercising its revisional 
jurisdiction for the purpose of setting aside the order of 
the Trial Court rejecting the second application preferred 
by the respondent no. 2 under section 319 of the CrPC? 
75.	 We are in seisin of the fact that the order dated 14.09.2021 passed 
by the High Court in Revision Petition No. 400/2010, before it was 
acted upon, was not challenged by the appellants before any forum 
and thus could be said to have attained finality. What is impugned 
before us is the order passed by the High Court rejecting the Section 
482 petition filed against the order of the Trial Court allowing the 
application under Section 319 of the CrPC and summoning the 
appellants as accused to face trial. However, to have a comprehensive 
overview of the matter and considering the peculiar circumstances 
in which the order in Revision Petition 400/2010 came to be passed, 
we deem it appropriate to examine whether the High Court was right 
in exercising its revisional jurisdiction to set aside the order of the 
Trial Court rejecting the application under Section 319 and directing 
it to consider the same afresh.
76.	 Explaining the scope of revisional jurisdiction under Section 397 of 
the CrPC, this Court in Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander reported 
in (2012) 9 SCC 460 made the following observations: 
“12. Section 397 of the Code vests the court with the 
power to call for and examine the records of an inferior 
court for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality 
and regularity of any proceedings or order made in a case. 
The object of this provision is to set right a patent 
defect or an error of jurisdiction or law. There has to 
be a well-founded error and it may not be appropriate 
for the court to scrutinise the orders, which upon 
the face of it bears a token of careful consideration 
and appear to be in accordance with law. If one looks 
into the various judgments of this Court, it emerges that 
the revisional jurisdiction can be invoked where the 
decisions under challenge are grossly erroneous, there 
is no compliance with the provisions of law, the finding 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
689
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
recorded is based on no evidence, material evidence 
is ignored or judicial discretion is exercised arbitrarily 
or perversely. These are not exhaustive classes, but 
are merely indicative. Each case would have to be 
determined on its own merits.
13. Another well-accepted norm is that the revisional 
jurisdiction of the higher court is a very limited one 
and cannot be exercised in a routine manner. One of 
the inbuilt restrictions is that it should not be against 
an interim or interlocutory order. The Court has to 
keep in mind that the exercise of revisional jurisdiction 
itself should not lead to injustice ex facie. Where the 
Court is dealing with the question as to whether the charge 
has been framed properly and in accordance with law in 
a given case, it may be reluctant to interfere in exercise 
of its revisional jurisdiction unless the case substantially 
falls within the categories aforestated. Even framing of 
charge is a much advanced stage in the proceedings 
under the CrPC.
18. It may also be noticed that the revisional jurisdiction 
exercised by the High Court is in a way final and 
no inter court remedy is available in such cases. Of 
course, it may be subject to jurisdiction of this Court 
under Article 136 of the Constitution of India. Normally, 
a revisional jurisdiction should be exercised on a 
question of law. However, when factual appreciation is 
involved, then it must find place in the class of cases 
resulting in a perverse finding. Basically, the power 
is required to be exercised so that justice is done 
and there is no abuse of power by the court. Merely 
an apprehension or suspicion of the same would not 
be a sufficient ground for interference in such cases.
--xxx--
20. The jurisdiction of the court under Section 397 
can be exercised so as to examine the correctness, 
legality or propriety of an order passed by the trial 
court or the inferior court, as the case may be. Though 
the section does not specifically use the expression 
690
Supreme Court Reports
“prevent abuse of process of any court or otherwise 
to secure the ends of justice”, the jurisdiction under 
Section 397 is a very limited one. The legality, propriety 
or correctness of an order passed by a court is the very 
foundation of exercise of jurisdiction under Section 
397 but ultimately it also requires justice to be done. 
The jurisdiction could be exercised where there is 
palpable error, non-compliance with the provisions of 
law, the decision is completely erroneous or where the 
judicial discretion is exercised arbitrarily. […]”
(Emphasis supplied)
77.	 A perusal of the aforesaid decision indicates that the scope of 
revisional jurisdiction is limited and is to set right a patent illegality 
or defect of law in the order of a subordinate court. The power of 
revision is not as extensive as that under Section 482 of the CrPC 
and should not be exercised lightly. 
78.	 The High Court passed the order dated 14.09.2021 setting aside 
the order of the Trial Court on two grounds: 
a.	
First, the mere fact that chargesheet had not been filed against 
the proposed accused despite there being a FIR against them 
cannot be a ground for not proceeding against them under 
Section 319 of the CrPC.
b.	
Secondly, the Trial Court wrongly assumed that as the first 
informant/ respondent no. 2 didn’t know the proposed accused 
persons by name and hence their presence at the time of the 
commission of the offence was not established. 
79.	 The High Court observed that the settled position of law was that the 
filing or non-filing of a chargesheet would not have any effect on the 
power of the court to proceed against the proposed accused under 
Section 319 of the CrPC. Thus, we are of the view that the High 
Court was right in exercising its revisional jurisdiction as the order 
was passed to set aside the order of a subordinate court which was 
based on a misapplication of the settled position of law and thus 
could be said to have been suffering from a patent illegality. 
80.	 In such circumstances, the High Court set aside the order of the Trial 
Court and directed it to reconsider the application under Section 319 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
691
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
within a period of three months. The question that now arises is 
whether any meaningful effect can be given to the order of the High 
Court for a fresh consideration of the application under Section 319 
of the CrPC after the conclusion of the main trial. 
(vi)	 Whether the order passed by the High Court in exercise 
of its revisional jurisdiction would relate back to the order 
passed by the Trial Court rejecting the application under 
Section 319 of the CrPC
81.	 This Court in Hardeep Singh (supra) observed that Section 319 
casts a duty upon the courts to give full effect to the words used by 
the legislature to ensure that no person who deserves to be tried is 
able to go scot-free. The relevant paragraphs are reproduced below: 
“18. The legislature cannot be presumed to have imagined 
all the circumstances and, therefore, it is the duty of the 
court to give full effect to the words used by the legislature 
so as to encompass any situation which the court may 
have to tackle while proceeding to try an offence and not 
allow a person who deserves to be tried to go scot-free by 
being not arraigned in the trial in spite of the possibility of 
his complicity which can be gathered from the documents 
presented by the prosecution.
19. The court is the sole repository of justice and a duty 
is cast upon it to uphold the rule of law and, therefore, it 
will be inappropriate to deny the existence of such powers 
with the courts in our criminal justice system where it is 
not uncommon that the real accused, at times, get away 
by manipulating the investigating and/or the prosecuting 
agency. The desire to avoid trial is so strong that an 
accused makes efforts at times to get himself absolved 
even at the stage of investigation or inquiry even though 
he may be connected with the commission of the offence.” 
82.	 In Shashikant Singh (supra), this Court emphasised on the duty of 
the courts to give a meaningful or rather a purposeful interpretation 
to Section 319 so as to fulfil its avowed objective of ensuring that 
no person who is guilty of an offence goes unpunished. The Court 
observed thus: 
692
Supreme Court Reports
“8. When a statute is passed for the purpose of enabling 
something to be done, and prescribes the way in which 
it is to be done, it may be either an absolute enactment 
or a directory enactment. The difference being that an 
absolute enactment must be obeyed or fulfilled exactly, 
but it is sufficient if a directory enactment be obeyed or 
fulfilled substantially. No universal rule can be laid down 
as to whether mandatory enactments shall be considered 
directory only or obligatory with an implied nullification for 
disobedience. It is the duty of courts of justice to try to get 
at the real intention of the legislature by carefully attending 
to the whole scope of the statute to be construed. (Craies 
on Statute Law, 7th Edn., pp. 260-62.)
9. The intention of the provision here is that where in 
the course of any enquiry into, or trial of, an offence, it 
appears to the court from the evidence that any person 
not being the accused has committed any offence, the 
court may proceed against him for the offence which he 
appears to have committed. At that stage, the court would 
consider that such a person could be tried together with 
the accused who is already before the court facing the 
trial. The safeguard provided in respect of such person 
is that, the proceedings right from the beginning have 
mandatorily to be commenced afresh and the witnesses 
reheard. In short, there has to be a de novo trial against 
him. The provision of de novo trial is mandatory. It vitally 
affects the rights of a person so brought before the court. 
It would not be sufficient to only tender the witnesses 
for the cross-examination of such a person. They have 
to be examined afresh. Fresh examination-in-chief and 
not only their presentation for the purpose of the cross-
examination of the newly added accused is the mandate 
of Section 319(4). The words “could be tried together 
with the accused” in Section 319(1), appear to be only 
directory. “Could be” cannot under these circumstances be 
held to be “must be”. The provision cannot be interpreted 
to mean that since the trial in respect of a person who 
was before the court has concluded with the result that 
the newly added person cannot be tried together with 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
693
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
the accused who was before the court when order under 
Section 319(1) was passed, the order would become 
ineffective and inoperative, nullifying the opinion earlier 
formed by the court on the basis of the evidence before it 
that the newly added person appears to have committed 
the offence resulting in an order for his being brought 
before the court.” 
83.	 A strict application of the dictum as laid in Sukhpal Singh Khaira 
(supra) as regards the stage of passing of summoning order under 
Section 319 of the CrPC to the peculiar facts in the present case may 
be antithetical to the very object of Section 319 and would render the 
order of the High Court nugatory and incapable of being given effect 
to despite having been passed to rectify a patent mistake committed 
by the Trial Court. In our considered view, the aforesaid would lead 
to a serious miscarriage of justice. Such a result is also contrary to 
the principle enshrined in the legal maxim nullum tempus aut locus 
occurrit regi which means that “crime never dies”.
84.	 The facts of the case on hand are peculiar and require us to go one 
step ahead of our present understanding of Section 319. We are of 
the view that the answer to present conundrum lies in determining 
the legal effect of the order passed by the High Court in exercise of 
its revisional jurisdiction and whether it operates from the date on 
which it came to be passed or would it relate back to the date of the 
order of the Trial Court against which it was passed.
85.	 This Court in Maru Ram v. Union of India, reported in (1981) 1 
SCC 107 held that:
“56. We are mindful of one anomaly and must provide for 
its elimination. If the Trial Court acquits and the higher 
Court convicts and it so happens that the acquittal is before 
Section 433-A came into force and the conviction after it, 
could it be that the convicted person would be denied the 
benefit of prospectivity and consequential non-application 
of Section 433-A merely because he had the bad luck to 
be initially acquitted? We think not. When a person is 
convicted in appeal, it follows that the appellate Court 
has exercised its power in the place of the original 
court and the guilt, conviction and sentence must be 
substituted for and shall have retroactive effect from 
694
Supreme Court Reports
the date of judgment of the Trial Court. The appellate 
conviction must relate back to the date of the Trial 
Court’s verdict and substitute it. In this view, even if 
the appellate Court reverses an earlier acquittal rendered 
before Section 433-A came into force but allows the appeal 
and convicts the accused, after Section 433-A came into 
force, such persons will also be entitled to the benefit of 
the remission system prevailing prior to Section 433-A on 
the basis we have explained. An appeal is a continuation 
of an appellate judgment as a replacement of the 
original judgment. [Freedom Behind Bars — Criminology 
and Consciousness, Series I, 1979, Maharshi European 
Research University Press Publication, p. 73]”
(Emphasis supplied)
86.	 The judgment in Maru Ram (supra) is relevant to the extent that 
the order of the appellate court relates back to the order of the Trial 
Court on the premise that an appeal is a continuation of trial and 
an appellate judgment is a replacement of the original judgment. 
87.	 Once the High Court i.e., a superior court deems fit to interfere with 
an order of a subordinate court, then any rectifications made to the 
order passed by the subordinate court by such superior court in 
exercise of revisional powers under Section 401 read with Section 
397 of the CrPC must be treated on the same footing as rectifications 
made by an appellate court and relate back to the original order.
88.	 This Court in Shankar Ramchandra Abhyankar v. Krishnaji 
Dattatreya Bapat reported in (1969) 2 SCC 74 observed thus:
“6. Now when the aid of the High Court is invoked on 
the revisional side it is done because it is a superior 
court and it can interfere for the purpose of rectifying 
the error of the court below. Section 115 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure circumscribes the limits of that jurisdiction 
but the jurisdiction which is being exercised is a part of the 
general appellate jurisdiction of the High Court as a superior 
court. It is only one of the modes of exercising power 
conferred by the statute; basically and fundamentally 
it is the appellate jurisdiction of the High Court which 
is being invoked and exercised in a wider and larger 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
695
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
sense. We do not, therefore, consider that the principle 
of merger of orders of inferior courts in those of 
superior Courts would be affected or would become 
inapplicable by making a distinction between a petition 
for revision and an appeal.
7. It may be useful to refer to certain other decisions which 
by analogy can be of some assistance in deciding the point 
before us. In U.J.S. Chopra v. State of Bombay [1955 
SCC OnLine SC 57 : AIR 1955 SC 633], the principle 
of merger was considered with reference to Section 
439 of the Criminal Procedure Code which confers 
revisional jurisdiction on the High Court. In the majority 
judgment it was held, inter alia, that a judgment 
pronounced by the High Court in the exercise of its 
appellate or revisional jurisdiction after issue of a 
notice and a full hearing, in the presence of both the 
parties would replace the judgment of the lower court 
thus constituting the judgment of the High Court—the 
only final judgment to be executed in accordance with 
law by the Court below. […] ”
(Emphasis supplied)
89.	 The reasoning assigned by this Court in Krishnaji Dattatreya Bapat 
(supra) and U.J.S. Chopra v. State of Bombay reported in 1955 
SCC OnLine SC 57 when read with the reasoning in Maru Ram 
(supra) would indicate that the order of the High Court in exercise 
of its revisional jurisdiction relates back to and replaces the order of 
the Trial Court. It is of no consequence that the exercise of revisional 
jurisdiction is discretionary as opposed to appellate jurisdiction. It is 
settled law that an appellate court exercises its power in the place 
of the original court and the order passed by such court shall have 
retroactive effect from the date of judgment of the Trial Court. Similarly, 
once the High Court, being the superior court, decides to interfere 
with the order of the Trial Court and passes an order in exercise of 
its revisional jurisdiction with the purpose of rectifying any errors in 
the same, such order will replace the order of the Trial Court. 
90.	 What can be discerned from the aforesaid is that if the High Court 
passes an order in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction either setting 
aside or modifying the order of the Trial Court for the purpose of 
696
Supreme Court Reports
Section 319, the same would relate back to the original order passed 
by the Trial Court and substitute it to the extent of modification. 
91.	 Besides above, the normal rule is that in any litigation the rights 
and obligations of the parties are adjudicated upon as they obtain 
at the commencement of the lis. But this is subject to an exception. 
Wherever subsequent events of facts or law which have a material 
bearing on the entitlement of the parties to the relief or on aspects 
which bear on the moulding of the relief occur, the court is not 
precluded from taking a ‘cautious cognizance of the subsequent 
changes of fact and law to mould the relief (See: Ramesh Kumar v. 
Kesho Ram reported in 1992 Supp (2) SCC 623). Justice Krishna 
Iyer in Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu v. Motor and General Traders, 
reported in (1975) 1 SCC 770 has observed thus:
“4. … It is basic to our processual jurisprudence that the 
right to relief must be judged to exist as on the date a suitor 
institutes the legal proceeding. Equally clear is the principle 
that procedure is the handmaid and not the mistress of the 
judicial process. If a fact, arising after the lis has come to 
court and has a fundamental impact on the right to or the 
manner of moulding it, is brought diligently to the notice 
of the tribunal, it cannot blink at it or be blind to events 
which stultify or render inept the decretal remedy. Equity 
justifies bending the rules of procedure, where no specific 
provision or fair play is violated, with a view to promote 
substantial justice - subject, of course, to the absence 
of other disentitling factors or just circumstances. Nor 
can we contemplate any limitation on this power to take 
note of updated facts to confine it to the trial court. If the 
litigation pends, the power exists, absent other special 
circumstances repelling resort to that course in law or 
justice. Rulings in this point are legion, even as situations 
for applications of this equitable rule are myriad.”
Though the aforesaid observations are in the context of civil 
proceedings, the legal principle enshrined therein is based on a 
well-known latin maxim “actus curaie neminen gravabit” – “an act of 
court shall prejudice no man”, which is of universal application. As 
a sequitur, no man should suffer because of the fault of the court 
or delay in the procedure. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
697
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
92.	 In the present case, the High Court, in exercise of its revisional 
jurisdiction, set aside the order of the Trial Court rejecting the second 
application under Section 319 of the CrPC and directed the Trial 
Court to reconsider the application under Section 319. At the stage 
of issuing the aforesaid direction, the High Court was conscious that 
the trial had concluded, yet to do substantial justice, it deemed it 
necessary to issue such a direction. In doing so, the High Court’s 
order, which relates back to the date of the Trial Court’s order, did not 
mandate the Trial Court to do something which was barred by law 
because, as already noticed above, holding a joint trial is directory. 
Therefore, in complying with the said direction of the High Court, the 
Trial Court committed no act which was prohibited by law. 
93.	 There is not an iota of doubt that if the Trial Court would have 
proceeded against the appellants under Section 319 of the CrPC in 
the absence of the order passed by the High Court in the revision 
petition, the same would have been illegal for having being done 
after the conclusion of the trial of the original accused in light of 
the clear guidelines laid down in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra). 
However, by virtue of relating back of the order passed by the High 
Court in the revision petition, the summoning order passed by the 
Trial Court in compliance with the order of the High Court would 
also relate back to the initial order rejecting the second application 
under Section 319, and for this reason could be said to have been 
passed before the conclusion of the trial. 
94.	 This Court in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra) had no occasion 
to consider a factual situation like the one at hand, and thus the 
guidelines laid down by the Constitution Bench did not prescribe 
anything as regards the application of Section 319 of the CrPC 
in the context of revisional jurisdiction of the High Court. In such 
circumstances, the spirit underlying Section 319 requires us to adopt 
an approach which furthers and fulfils the object of the provision 
rather than rendering it nugatory. 
95.	 If the order of the High Court passed in its revisional jurisdiction 
is not related back, the consequence would be that although from 
the evidence, it appears that there are some other persons who 
might be involved in the offence, yet those persons will go scot-free 
solely because the Trial Court erred in not exercising its powers 
under Section 319 which it ought to have. Relating back the High 
698
Supreme Court Reports
Court’s revisional order to the date of the Trial Court’s order strikes 
a balance between the interests of the newly summoned persons 
and the general public/victims without causing prejudice to either.
96.	 While we have clarified the position of the effect of an order passed 
in exercise of revisional jurisdiction on an order passed under Section 
319, we deem it equally necessary to address the mechanism for 
exercise of powers under Section 319 in cases where the trial is 
over but the revisional order relates back to the date of the rejection 
of an application under the said section by the Trial Court. It is 
axiomatic that in such a case there is no occasion for a joint trial to 
be conducted with the original accused persons. Therefore, when 
the order of the High Court passed in revision after the conclusion 
of trial relates back to the order of the Trial Court passed before the 
conclusion of trial, it must be taken to mean that the new accused 
would be proceeded against in a separate trial. Such a situation shall 
be governed by the guidelines provided in Sukhpal Singh Khaira 
(supra), more particularly, by the guideline in para 41.6 thereof which 
states that “if the decision is that the summoned accused can be tried 
separately, on such order being made, there will be no impediment 
for the court to continue and conclude the trial against the accused 
who were being proceeded with.” We clarify with a view to obviate 
any confusion that there is no requirement for a decision by the Trial 
Court on the question of separation of trial in cases like the present 
one since the trial has already concluded in respect of the original 
accused and the only manner in which the order of the High Court 
can be given effect to is by proceeding in a separate trial qua the 
new accused persons. 
97.	 We deem it appropriate to refer to the decision of this Court in Uday 
Mohanlal Acharya v. State of Maharashtra reported in (2001) 5 
SCC 453. In the said case, the appellant before this Court was an 
accused in relation to certain offences for which he was remanded 
to judicial custody. Upon expiry of sixty days, the accused-appellant 
moved an application for the grant of default bail as no chargesheet 
was filed by the investigating agency. However, the application came 
to be rejected by the Magistrate who took the view that provisions 
of Section 167(2) would not be applicable to the offence committed 
under the Maharashtra Protection of Interest of Depositors (in 
Financial Establishments) Act, 1999 (“MPID Act”). The appellant filed 
a revision before the High Court against the order passed by the 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
699
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
Magistrate. During the pendency of the revision, chargesheet was 
filed by the investigating authorities. In such circumstances, although 
the High Court set aside the order of the Magistrate on the ground 
that Section 167(2) of the CrPC would apply to offences under the 
MPID Act yet it held that the accused-appellant was not entitled to 
be released on bail as chargesheet had come to be filed during 
the pendency of the revision thereby rendering the right accrued in 
favour of the appellant unenforceable. The matter travelled to this 
Court, wherein G.B. Pattanaik, J. speaking for himself and U.C. 
Banerjee, J. took the view that a purposive interpretation had to be 
given to the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 167 of the CrPC 
and the object of the proviso to curb the mischief of indefinite and 
prolonged investigation had to be kept in mind while interpreting 
the provision. The relevant paragraphs from the said decision are 
reproduced hereinbelow:
“10. In Bipin Shantilal Panchal (Dr) v. State of Gujarat 
[(1996) 1 SCC 718 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 200] , a three-Judge 
Bench decision, this Court referred to the proviso to sub-
section (2) of Section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
and held that though the aforesaid provisions would apply 
to an accused under the NDPS Act, but since the charge-
sheet had already been filed and the accused is in custody 
on the basis of orders of remand passed under other 
provisions of the Code the so-called indefeasible right of 
the accused must be held to have been extinguished, as 
was held by the Constitution Bench in Sanjay Dutt [(1994) 
5 SCC 410 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1433] . The Court observed 
thus: (SCC p. 720, para 4)
“Therefore, if an accused person fails to exercise 
his right to be released on bail for the failure of 
the prosecution to file the charge-sheet within the 
maximum time allowed by law, he cannot contend 
that he had an indefeasible right to exercise it 
at any time notwithstanding the fact that in the 
meantime the charge-sheet is filed. But on the 
other hand if he exercises the right within the 
time allowed by law and is released on bail under 
such circumstances, he cannot be rearrested on 
the mere filing of the charge-sheet, as pointed 
700
Supreme Court Reports
out in Aslam Babalal Desai v. State of Maharashtra 
[(1992) 4 SCC 272 : 1992 SCC (Cri) 870].”
--xxx--
13. […] In such a case, therefore, even if the application 
for consideration of an order of being released on 
bail is posted before the court after some length of 
time, or even if the Magistrate refuses the application 
erroneously and the accused moves the higher forum 
for getting a formal order of being released on bail 
in enforcement of his indefeasible right, then filing of 
challan at that stage will not take away the right of 
the accused. […] 
With the aforesaid interpretation of the expression “availed 
of” if the charge-sheet is filed subsequent to the availing 
of the indefeasible right by the accused then that right 
would not stand frustrated or extinguished, necessarily 
therefore, if an accused entitled to be released on 
bail by application of the proviso to sub-section (2) 
of Section 167, makes the application before the 
Magistrate, but the Magistrate erroneously refuses 
the same and rejects the application and then the 
accused moves the higher forum and while the 
matter remains pending before the higher forum for 
consideration a charge-sheet is filed, the so-called 
indefeasible right of the accused would not stand 
extinguished thereby, and on the other hand, the 
accused has to be released on bail. Such an accused, 
who thus is entitled to be released on bail in enforcement 
of his indefeasible right will, however, have to be produced 
before the Magistrate on a charge-sheet being filed in 
accordance with Section 209 and the Magistrate must 
deal with him in the matter of remand to custody subject 
to the provisions of the Code relating to bail and subject 
to the provisions of cancellation of bail, already granted 
in accordance with the law laid down by this Court in the 
case of Mohd. Iqbal v. State of Maharashtra [(1996) 1 
SCC 722 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 202].”
(Emphasis supplied)
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
701
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
98.	 We are conscious of the fact that unlike Section 167(2), where an 
indefeasible right accrues in favour of the accused upon the expiry 
of the period of sixty/ninety days, Section 319 is a discretionary 
provision and no right can be said to accrue in the applicant upon 
making of the application under Section 319. However, as held by 
this Court in a number of its decisions, Section 319 casts a duty on 
the court to ensure that any person who appears to have committed 
the crime must be brought before the court and tried along with other 
accused. In the present case, the application under Section 319 was 
made by the respondent no. 2 during the pendency of the trial. As 
per the guidelines laid down in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra), if 
an application under Section 319 is made before a trial court, the 
court must stop the trial and proceed to determine the application 
first before proceeding further with the trial. In the present case, the 
Trial Court considered the application under Section 319 of the CrPC 
and after rejecting the same proceeded with the trial and concluded 
the same. The High Court, in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction, 
held that the rejection of the application under Section 319 by the 
Trial Court suffered from a patent illegality and thus directed the Trial 
Court to reconsider the application. In such circumstances, more 
particularly, keeping in mind the avowed objective of Section 319 
of the CrPC, it cannot be held that the order passed by the High 
Court in revision cannot be given effect to merely because the trial 
came to be concluded before an order could be passed by the 
High Court. The present, unlike the facts in Sukhpal Singh Khaira 
(supra), is not a case wherein the application under Section 319 
came to be filed or decided by the Trial Court after the conclusion 
of the trial. Instead, the case at hand is one wherein the application 
under Section 319 though decided at the correct stage, came to 
be decided wrongly owing to a patent illegality committed by the 
Trial Court. In such circumstances, an approach which gives full 
effect to the legislative intention behind Section 319 of the CrPC 
must be adopted. 
99.	 Having discussed the position of law on the exercise of power under 
Section 319 of the CrPC, we shall now proceed to apply them to the 
facts of the present case. The sequence of applications under Section 
319 of the CrPC and the consequential High Court proceedings 
arising therefrom are tabulated below: 
702
Supreme Court Reports
Application 
under 
Section 319
Court
Date of 
the Order
Remarks
First 
Application
Trial Court
29.01.2010
The first application was rejected.
Grounds:
	•
Investigation against the 
proposed accused was ongoing 
and remained pending.
	•
The cross-examination of PW-1 
& PW-2 was incomplete.
High Court
14.05.2010
The revision application against 
the order dated 29.01.2010 was 
allowed.
Direction:
	•
To the Trial Court to consider 
application under Section 319 
after the cross-examination of 
PW-1 & PW-2.
Second 
Application 
dated 
10.06.2010
Trial Court
19.07.2010
The second application was 
rejected on merits.
Trial was concluded on 19.10.2011 – Original accused were 
convicted and, inter alia, sentenced to life imprisonment.
High Court
14.09.2021
The revision application against 
the order dated 19.07.2010 was 
allowed on merits.
Direction:
	•
To the Trial Court to reconsider 
the application under Section 
319 within three months from 
the date of the order.
Note:
	•
It was noted by the High Court 
that the trial in respect of the 
original accused had already 
concluded.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
703
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
Third 
Application 
dated 
22.09.2021
(the 
complainant 
renewed 
the prayer 
under 
Section 
319)
Trial Court
21.02.2024
The third application was allowed 
on merits.
Direction:
	•
To summon the appellants 
herein as accused.
Note:
	•
It was recorded that the Trial 
Court had been authorized by 
the order dated 14.09.2021 
of the High Court to allow the 
application under Section 319.
High Court
01.04.2024
The application preferred by the 
appellants herein under Section 
482 of the CrPC was dismissed 
and the order dated 21.02.2024 
was upheld.
Note:
	•
It was recorded that as per 
Section 319(4), the trial against 
the summoned accused has to 
be commenced afresh and the 
witnesses re-heard. Therefore, 
the conclusion of trial in respect 
of the accused summoned 
originally would not cause any 
prejudice to the appellants 
herein.
100.	What is clear from the above is that as the Trial Court rejected the 
application under Section 319, no summoning order could be passed 
before the conclusion of trial. However, the High Court in exercise 
of its revisional jurisdiction set aside the said order and directed the 
Trial Court to reconsider the application under Section 319.
101.	We have discussed in the preceding parts of this judgment that 
the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court cannot be rendered 
nugatory solely because the trial was not stayed by the High Court 
and stood concluded before the High Court could pass the order in 
704
Supreme Court Reports
exercise of its revisional jurisdiction. Therefore, unlike cases where 
an application under Section 319 is being decided in the first instance 
by the Trial Court, the conclusion of trial will not have a bearing on 
the adjudication of an application under Section 319 in terms of the 
directions of the High Court passed by way of a revisional order.
102.	As discussed hereinabove, an order passed by the High Court in 
exercise of its revisional jurisdiction would relate back to the order of 
the Trial Court. In the present case, the Trial Court in its discretion 
rejected the second application filed under Section 319 before the 
conclusion of trial vide order dated 19.07.2010. The High Court, 
more than ten years after the conclusion of trial, set aside the said 
order and directed the Trial Court to reconsider the application under 
Section 319 afresh. In our considered view, such order passed by 
the High Court on the second application under Section 319 travels 
back to 19.07.2010 i.e., the date when the Trial Court rejected the 
said application. The effect of the order of the High Court relating 
back to the original order of the Trial Court is that the Trial Court 
cannot be considered functus officio as regards considering the 
application under Section 319 after the conclusion of the trial. We 
say so because the Trial Court, in considering the application under 
Section 319 after the conclusion of the trial, is merely giving effect 
to a revisionary order directing it to freshly consider the application 
which it had originally rejected.
103.	Ordinarily, an application under the Section 319 cannot be moved 
after the conclusion of trial as a necessary corollary of the dictum laid 
down in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra). However, the peculiar facts 
and circumstances presented by the case on hand indicate that an 
application under Section 319 dated 10.06.2010 was directed to be 
considered afresh by the High Court vide order dated 14.09.2021 and, 
therefore, the third application dated 22.09.2021 was not even required, 
though moved by the respondent no. 2 in pursuance of the order of 
the High Court order dated 14.09.2021 allowing the revision petition. 
Accordingly, the summoning order, in exercise of the powers under 
Section 319, came to be passed by the Trial Court on 21.02.2024.
104.	The summoning order dated 21.02.2024 was passed by the Trial 
Court in pursuance of the direction issued by the High Court vide its 
revisional order dated 14.09.2021. Therefore, it has to been seen as 
an extension of the revisional order passed by the High Court. The 
combined effect of the revisional order passed by the High Court and 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
705
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
the summoning order passed by the Trial Court on 21.02.2024 is that 
the order of the Trial Court dated 19.07.2010 rejecting the second 
Section 319 application is replaced and substituted by the summoning 
order dated 21.02.2024. Thus, although the summoning order in the 
present case came to be passed on 21.02.2024, that is, after the 
conclusion of the trial, yet it would be deemed to have been passed 
on 19.07.2010 by virtue of the law expounded by this Court in Maru 
Ram (supra) and Krishnaji Dattatreya Bapat (supra). Thus, as the 
summoning order can be deemed to have been passed before the 
conclusion of the trial, there is no impediment for the Trial Court to 
proceed with the appellants in the manner envisaged under Section 319 
of the CrPC. As the summoning order passed in compliance with the 
order passed by High Court in revision takes effect from the date of 
the original order, this ensures that there is compliance with the dictum 
laid in Sukhpal Singh Khaira (supra) that the summoning order has 
to be necessarily passed before the conclusion of the trial.
105.	We are also of the view that the relating back of the order of the 
High Court is not going to cause any prejudice to the appellants. 
Considering that the original trial has already concluded, there will 
have to be a separate trial so far as the appellants are concerned. 
Section 319(4)(a) takes care of the rights of the newly summoned 
persons by providing that “the proceedings in respect of such person 
shall be commenced afresh, and the witnesses re-heard”.
106.	In view of the aforesaid, we have arrived at the conclusion that 
the order passed in revision by the High Court cannot be rendered 
ineffective merely on procedural grounds especially when it involves 
substantive rights of the parties and seeks to cure a patent illegality. 
However, it is apposite to clarify in the same breath that although the 
law allows for travelling back of the revisional order of the High Court, 
yet it is far from ideal to do so after the passage of a substantial 
period of time, in this case, ten years after the conclusion of trial. 
The correct approach to be adopted in cases like this is that the 
High Court should direct the Trial Court to stay its proceedings till 
the revision proceedings in respect of Section 319 are disposed of. 
At the same time, the High Court must also expedite the revision 
proceedings so as to ensure that unreasonable delay is not caused 
in the conclusion of trial.
107.	The High Court in its impugned order has rightly observed that the 
summoning order dated 21.02.2024 was passed in compliance 
706
Supreme Court Reports
with the order passed by the High Court in exercise of its revisional 
jurisdiction. It further correctly observed that the order passed by the 
High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction was in furtherance 
of the object of Section 319 of the CrPC which is to ensure that 
the actual perpetrators of a crime are arraigned as accused to face 
trial. The High Court was also right in observing that the conclusion 
of the trial qua the original accused would not prejudice the 
appellants in any manner and their interest would be safeguarded by 
sub-section (4) of Section 319 of the CrPC. The High Court also 
noted that the summoning order, though having been passed after 
the conclusion of the trial, cannot be said to be vitiated in the peculiar 
facts and circumstances of the case. For all the reasons that we have 
assigned in the preceding parts of this judgment, we do not see any 
reason to interfere with the impugned order passed by the High Court.
(vii)	 Right of the proposed accused to be heard at the stage of 
summoning under Section 319 of CrPC
108.	Before we part with the matter, we deem it necessary to address 
the submissions of the appellants as regards the violation of their 
right to be heard before the passing of the order in Revision Petition 
400/2010 by the High Court.
109.	As regards the right of the proposed accused to be heard before 
an application under Section 319 is allowed by the court, we are in 
respectful agreement with a recent pronouncement of this Court in 
Yashodhan Singh v. State of U.P. reported in (2023) 9 SCC 108 
wherein it has been held that Section 319 does not contemplate that 
a summoned person must be given an opportunity of being heard 
before being added as an accused to face the trial. The relevant 
observations from the said decision are reproduced hereinbelow:
“23. From the aforesaid observations of the Constitution 
Bench of this Court in Hardeep Singh [Hardeep Singh v. 
State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC 92 : (2014) 2 SCC 
(Cri) 86] , it is noted that an inquiry is contemplated as 
against a person who has been discharged prior to the 
commencement of the trial in terms of Section 227 CrPC 
as extracted above but on an inquiry, if it appears that there 
is evidence against such a discharged person, then power 
under Section 319 CrPC can be exercised against such 
a discharged person. This clearly would mean that when 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
707
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
a person who is not discharged but is to be summoned 
as per Section 319 CrPC on the basis of satisfaction 
derived by the court on the evidence on record, no inquiry 
or hearing is contemplated. This would clearly indicate 
that principle of natural justice and an opportunity of 
hearing a person summoned under 319 CrPC are not at 
all contemplated. Such a right of inquiry would accrue 
only to a person who is already discharged in the very 
same proceeding prior to the commencement of the 
trial. This is different from holding that a person who 
has been summoned as per Section 319 CrPC has a 
right of being heard in accordance with the principles 
of natural justice before being added as an accused 
to be tried along with other accused.
--xxx--
35. This Court in the subsequent paragraphs of Jogendra 
Yadav [Jogendra Yadav v. State of Bihar, (2015) 9 SCC 
244 : (2015) 3 SCC (Cri) 756] has also not stated that if a 
person is to be summoned under Section 319 CrPC to be 
added as an accused, then an opportunity must be given 
to such a person and only after hearing him, he could 
be added as an accused in the trial. We do not find that 
the ratio of Jogendra Yadav [Jogendra Yadav v. State of 
Bihar, (2015) 9 SCC 244 : (2015) 3 SCC (Cri) 756] turns 
on the said aspect.
36. However, it is contented by the learned Senior Counsel 
Shri Nagamuthu that what has been observed in para 9 
of Jogendra Yadav [Jogendra Yadav v. State of Bihar, 
(2015) 9 SCC 244 : (2015) 3 SCC (Cri) 756] will make it 
a necessary mandate or a rule that a person who is to be 
summoned under Section 319 CrPC to be added as an 
accused will necessarily be heard before being so added. 
Para 9 cannot be considered to be the ratio of Jogendra 
Yadav [Jogendra Yadav v. State of Bihar, (2015) 9 SCC 
244 : (2015) 3 SCC (Cri) 756] . Further, the context in 
which the observations are made in the paragraph must 
relate to the facts of the said case where an opportunity 
was in fact provided to the persons summoned therein.
708
Supreme Court Reports
37. Similarly, in Ram Janam Yadav [Ram Janam Yadav v. 
State of U.P., (2023) 9 SCC 130] , on facts, it was noticed 
that the person summoned was, in fact, provided an 
opportunity of hearing.
38. Merely because in certain proceedings the persons 
summoned had been provided an opportunity of being 
heard cannot be the same thing as stating that it is a 
mandatory requirement or a precondition that at the 
time of summoning a person under Section 319 CrPC, 
he should be given an opportunity of being heard. 
That is not the mandate of law inasmuch as Section 
319 clearly uses the expression “to proceed” which 
means to proceed with the trial and not to jeopardise 
the trial at the instance of the person(s) summoned by 
conducting a mini trial or a trial within a trial thereby 
derailing the main trial of the case and particularly 
against the accused who are already facing trial and 
who may be in custody.
39. A person who is summoned in exercise of the power 
under Section 319 CrPC cannot hijack the trial so to say 
and deviate from its focus and take it to a tangent in order 
to bolster his own case in a bid to escape trial. All that is 
contemplated when a person is summoned to appear is to 
ascertain that he is the very person who was summoned 
and if any summoned person fails to appear on the given 
date. On the appearance of the summoned person, no 
procedure of an inquiry or opportunity of being heard is 
envisaged before been added as an accused to the list 
of accused already facing trial unless such a summoned 
person had already been discharged, in which event, 
an inquiry is contemplated as discussed above.
40. Thus, the contention that a summoned person 
must be given an opportunity of being heard before 
being added as an accused to face the trial is clearly 
not contemplated under Section 319 CrPC. It is also 
observed by this Court in Hardeep Singh [Hardeep Singh v. 
State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC 92 : (2014) 2 SCC (Cri) 86] 
that such a summoned person can assail a summoning 
order before a superior Court and will also have the right 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
709
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
of cross-examining the witnesses as well as can let in his 
defence evidence, if any.”
(Emphasis supplied)
110.	However, in the facts of the present case, the application under 
Section 319 was rejected by the Trial Court but the revision against 
such rejection was entertained by the High Court without allegedly 
putting the proposed accused to notice. Upon a careful perusal of 
the decision in Yashodhan Singh (supra), we are of the view that 
the right of hearing is not available to the proposed accused only 
in the first instance, that is only at the stage when the application is 
being heard for the first time. 
111.	 However, after the rejection of an application under Section 319, 
a right enures in favour of the proposed accused. Thereafter, if in 
exercise of revisional jurisdiction, the High Court is to pass an order 
which is prejudicial to the benefit which has enured in favour of the 
proposed accused, then the High Court is required to provide an 
opportunity of hearing to the proposed accused. This is also the 
mandate as contained in sub-section (2) of Section 401 of the CrPC. 
The said provision is reproduced hereinbelow: 
“401. High Court’s powers of revision.
(1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which 
has been called for by itself or which otherwise comes 
to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its discretion, 
exercise any of the powers conferred on a Court of 
Appeal by sections 386, 389, 390 and 391 or on a 
Court of Session by section 307, and, when the Judges 
composing the Court of Revision are equally divided in 
opinion, the case shall be disposed of in the manner 
provided by section 392.
(2) No order under this section shall be made to the 
prejudice of the accused or other person unless he has 
had an opportunity of being heard either personally 
or by pleader in his own defence.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise 
a High Court to convert a finding of acquittal into one 
conviction.
710
Supreme Court Reports
(4) Where under this Code an appeal lies and no appeal 
is brought, no proceeding by way of revision shall be 
entertained at the instance of the party who could have 
appealed.
(5) Where under this Code an appeal lies but an application 
for revision has been made to the High Court by any person 
and the High Court is satisfied that such application was 
made under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto 
and that it is necessary in the interests of Justice so to do, 
the High Court may treat the application for revision as 
a petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly.”
(Emphasis supplied)
112.	The aforesaid principle was also recognised by this Court in 
Manharbhai Muljibhai Kakadia (supra). The relevant portion of the 
said decision is reproduced below:
“48. In a case where the complaint has been dismissed 
by the Magistrate under Section 203 of the Code either 
at the stage of Section 200 itself or on completion of 
inquiry by the Magistrate under Section 202 or on receipt 
of the report from the police or from any person to whom 
the direction was issued by the Magistrate to investigate 
into the allegations in the complaint, the effect of such 
dismissal is termination of complaint proceedings. On a 
plain reading of sub-section (2) of Section 401, it cannot 
be said that the person against whom the allegations of 
having committed the offence have been made in the 
complaint and the complaint has been dismissed by the 
Magistrate under Section 203, has no right to be heard 
because no process has been issued. The dismissal 
of complaint by the Magistrate under Section 203—
although it is at preliminary stage—nevertheless 
results in termination of proceedings in a complaint 
against the persons who are alleged to have committed 
the crime. Once a challenge is laid to such order at 
the instance of the complainant in a revision petition 
before the High Court or the Sessions Judge, by virtue 
of Section 401(2) of the Code, the suspects get the 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
711
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
right of hearing before the Revisional Court although 
such order was passed without their participation. The 
right given to “accused” or “the other person” under 
Section 401(2) of being heard before the Revisional 
Court to defend an order which operates in his favour 
should not be confused with the proceedings before 
a Magistrate under Sections 200, 202, 203 and 204. 
In the revision petition before the High Court or the 
Sessions Judge at the instance of the complainant 
challenging the order of dismissal of complaint, one 
of the things that could happen is reversal of the order 
of the Magistrate and revival of the complaint. It is 
in this view of the matter that the accused or other 
person cannot be deprived of hearing on the face of 
the express provision contained in Section 401(2) of 
the Code. The stage is not important whether it is 
pre-process stage or post process stage.”
(Emphasis supplied)
113.	In view of the principles explained in Manharbhai Muljibhai 
Kakadia (supra), the right of hearing is available to the proposed 
accused at the stage of revision as the High Court by setting aside 
the order rejecting the application under Section 319 may revive 
the proceedings against the proposed accused under Section 319. 
Providing the proposed accused with a mandatory right of hearing 
allows him to defend himself against a prejudicial order that may be 
passed in the course of the hearing of the revision petition.
114.	However, a perusal of the order dated 14.09.2021 passed in Revision 
Petition No. 400/2010 clearly indicates that the appellants were 
respondent nos. 2 and 4, respectively, before the High Court. Hence, 
we do not find any merit in the submission of the appellants that the 
order rejecting the 2nd application under Section 319 of the CrPC 
was set aside by the High Court without providing any opportunity 
of hearing to them.
F.	
CONCLUSION
115.	We summarise our findings on the issues framed for consideration 
as follows:
712
Supreme Court Reports
a.	
The High Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction was 
justified in setting aside the order passed by the Trial Court 
rejecting the second application preferred by respondent no. 2 
under Section 319 of the CrPC as the same was found to have 
been passed contrary to the settled position of law, suffering from 
a patent illegality, thus, leading to serious miscarriage of justice.
b.	
Once a superior court deems fit to interfere with an order 
passed by a subordinate court, then any rectifications to such 
order passed in exercise of revisional powers under Section 
401 read with Section 397 of the CrPC must be treated on 
the same footing as rectifications made by an appellate court 
and as a result would relate back to the time the original order 
was passed.
c.	
By virtue of relating back of the order passed by the High Court 
in a revision petition, the summoning order passed by the Trial 
Court in compliance with the order of the High Court would also 
relate back to the initial order rejecting the second application 
under Section 319, and therefore could be said to have been 
passed before the conclusion of the trial.
d.	
Unlike cases where an application under Section 319 is being 
decided in the first instance by the Trial Court, the conclusion 
of trial will have no bearing on the adjudication of an application 
under Section 319 in terms of the directions of the High Court 
passed in exercise of revisional jurisdiction.
e.	
The legal effect of the order passed by the High Court relating 
back to the original order of the Trial Court is that the Trial 
Court would not be rendered functus officio for the purpose of 
considering the application under Section 319 after the conclusion 
of the trial. We say so because the Trial Court, in considering the 
application under Section 319 after the conclusion of the trial, 
merely gave effect to a revisional order directing it to consider 
the application afresh which it had originally rejected.
f.	
The summoning order dated 21.02.2024 was passed by the 
Trial Court in pursuance of the directions issued by the High 
Court vide the revisional order dated 14.09.2021. Therefore, 
the same should be construed as an extension of the revisional 
order passed by the High Court. The combined effect of the 
revisional order passed by the High Court and the summoning 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
713
Jamin & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
order passed by the Trial Court dated 21.02.2024 would be 
that the order of the Trial Court dated 19.07.2010 rejecting the 
second Section 319 application stood replaced and substituted 
by the summoning order dated 21.02.2024. Thus, although the 
summoning order in the present case came to be passed on 
21.02.2024, that is, after the conclusion of the trial, yet, it would 
be deemed to have been passed on 19.07.2010 by virtue of 
the law expounded by this Court in Maru Ram (supra) and 
Krishnaji Dattatreya Bapat (supra).
g.	
Section 319 does not contemplate that a summoned person 
must be given an opportunity of being heard before being 
added as an accused to face the trial. A right of hearing would 
accrue only to a person who is already discharged in the very 
same proceeding prior to the commencement of the trial. This is 
different from holding that a person who has been  summoned as 
per Section 319 CrPC has a right of being heard in accordance 
with the principles of natural justice before being added as an 
accused to be tried along with the other accused. However, 
after the rejection of an application under Section 319, a right 
enures in favour of the proposed accused. Thereafter, if in 
exercise of revisional jurisdiction, the High Court is to pass 
an order which is prejudicial to the benefit which had already 
enured in favour of the proposed accused, then the High Court 
is obligated in law to provide an opportunity of hearing to the 
proposed accused. This is also the mandate as contained in 
sub-section (2) of Section 401 of the CrPC.
116.	For all the foregoing reasons, the appeal fails and is hereby dismissed. 
117.	The Trial Court is directed to take necessary steps in furtherance of 
the summoning order dated 21.02.2024 to ensure that the appellants 
are produced before the court to face the trial.
118.	Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan