[2025] 8 S.C.R. 395 : 2025 INSC 929
Deepak Kumar Sahu 
v. 
State of Chhattisgarh 
(Criminal Appeal No. 3352 of 2025)
05 August 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia and N.V. Anjaria,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The appellant came to be convicted and sentenced for the offences 
punishable u/ss.450 and 376(2) of the IPC and s.4 of the Protection 
of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 [POCSO Act]. Whether 
the High Court was justified in upholding and confirming the 
conviction and sentence awarded to the appellant-convict, by the 
trial court.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss. 450, 376(2) – Protection of Children from 
Sexual Offences Act, 2012 – s.4 – Allegation that appellant-
accused entered the house of victim aged about 15 years 
and sent her brother aged about 11 years to bring a pack 
of chewing tobacco – Once the brother left the house, the 
accused forced the victim to lie on the cot lying in the porch 
of the house, gagged her mouth and then committed sexual 
intercourse – Trial Court convicted accused u/ss.450, 376(2) 
of IPC and s.4 of the POCSO Act – The High Court upheld 
and confirm the conviction – Correctness:
Held: 1. The High Court was wholly justified in upholding and 
confirming the conviction and sentence awarded to the appellant-
convict, by the trial court. [Para 6.3]
2. Evaluating the total evidence in light of the principles of law, 
evidentiary appreciation and application, with the evidence of the 
victim at the forefront, it has to be stated that victim’s evidence 
was entirely probable, natural and trustworthy who with lucidity 
narrated the whole incident about commission of offence against 
her by the accused – There exists no reason, much less compelling 
reasons, to disbelieve and discard her testimony – Her brother’s 
testimony as a child witness was rationally and logically supportive 
* Author
396
Supreme Court Reports
of what the prosecutrix narrated – The factum that the cot was in 
the porch and the victim was forced to lay there by the accused 
could also be called out from the evidence. [Para 6]
3. There was a consistency lent – The conduct of the victim, soon 
after the incident was quite natural, as she went to cousin sister’s 
neighbouring house and through her, informed cousin brother and 
her parents who were away. [Para 6.1]
4. The crux of the incident, of accused overpowering the victim 
and committing forcible act by forcing her to the bed, could be 
clearly established from the totality of evidence adduced by the 
prosecution. [Para 6.2]
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.450, 376(2) – Protection of Children 
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 – s.4 – Appellant-accused 
convicted by the trial Court u/ss.450, 376(2) of IPC and s.4 of 
the POCSO Act – It was contended by the accused that non-
availability of emphatic medical evidence about occurrence 
of physical intercourse and absence of external injury marks 
make it imperative to doubt and disregard the evidence of 
the prosecutrix:
Held: 1. The contention that non-availability of emphatic medical 
evidence about occurrence of physical intercourse and absence 
of external injury marks make it imperative to doubt and disregard 
the evidence of the prosecutrix, could hardly be countenanced. 
[Para 5.4.1]
2. The crux of the incident, of accused overpowering the victim 
and committing forcible act by forcing her to the bed, could be 
clearly established from the totality of evidence adduced by the 
prosecution – Merely because the medical evidence was less 
corroborative and less supportive or absent in details or indictive 
of no external injuries – It in no way weakened the prosecution 
case – Sole testimony of the victim was a strong evidence to rely 
on along with available attendant evidence. [Para 6.2]
Case Law Cited
State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh [1996] 1 SCR 532 : (1996) 2 SCC 
384; Lok Mal alias Loku v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2025) 4 SCC 
470; State of Himachal Pradesh v. Manga Singh [2018] 14 SCR 
904 : (2019) 16 SCC 759 – relied on.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
397
Deepak Kumar Sahu v. State of Chhattisgarh
Wahid Khan v. State of Madhya Pradesh [2009] 15 SCR 1207 : 
(2010) 2 SCC 9; Raju alias Umakant v. State of Madhya Pradesh, 
2025 SCC OnLine SC 997; State of Maharashtra v. Chandraprakash 
Kewalchand Jain [1990] 1 SCR 115 : (1990) 1 SCC 550; Bharwada 
Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat [1983] 3 SCR 280 : (1983) 
3 SCC 217; State of Himachal Pradesh v. Lekh Raj [1999] Supp. 
4 SCR 286 : (2001) 1 SCC 247; Ousu Varghese v. State of Kerala 
(1974) 3 SCC 767; Jagdish v. State of Madhya Pradesh (1981) 
SCC (Crl.) 676; State of Rajasthan v. N.K. The Accused [2000] 2 
SCR 818 : (2000) 5 SCC 30 – referred to.
List of Acts
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012; Penal 
Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Sexual intercourse; Absence of external injury marks; Evidence 
of the prosecutrix; Sole testimony of the victim.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
3352 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 22.09.2023 of the High Court 
of Chhatisgarh at Bilaspur in CRA No. 34 of 2020
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Manish Kumar Saran, Ms. Ananya Tyagi, Sidhant Sharma.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
N.V. Anjaria, J.
Delay condoned. Leave granted.
2.	
Preferred by the appellant-accused, the present appeal addresses 
the challenge to judgment and order 22nd September, 2023 passed 
by the High Court of Chhattisgarh, at Bilaspur, in CRA No. 34 of 
398
Supreme Court Reports
2020 whereby the High Court continued the judgement and order 
of the Special Judge (SC/ST Court), Rajnandgaon, (CG) in Special 
Criminal (T) Case No. 10 of 2018, convicting and sentencing the 
appellant.
2.1	 The appellant came to be convicted for the offence punishable 
under Section 450 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 to undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for five years with fine of ₹5,00/-. He 
was also convicted for the offence punishable under Section 4 
of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 
[POCSO Act] and further came to be convicted for the offence 
under Section 376 (2), IPC to be sentenced to undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for ten years and with a fine of ₹1,000/-. The 
punishment for the offence under Section 376 (2), IPC, which 
was more severe to one provided for the offence under the 
POCSO Act therefore the same came to be awarded.
3.	
As per the prosecution case, the incident occurred on 03.04.2018 at 
about 12:00 Noon. On the fateful day, the victim aged about 15 years 
and her younger brother named Mayank, aged about 11 years were 
inside their house. The parents had gone to village Karate to attend 
the funeral as there was a death in their family. Finding the victim 
alone in the house, the appellant-accused entered the house. He 
thereafter sent the brother of the victim to bring a pack of chewing 
tobacco. Once the brother of the victim left the house, the accused 
forced the victim to lie on the cot lying in the porch of the house, 
gagged her mouth and then committed sexual intercourse. When the 
brother of the victim came back, seeing him, the appellant-accused 
fled away from the house, threatening the victim not to tell anything 
to anyone.
3.1	 Soon after the incident the victim went to her cousin sister- 
Dushyantin’s house in the neighbourhood and told about the 
incident. The brother of the Dushyantin named Khomendra, 
who had gone to village Kareti with the parents of the victim, 
was also informed through mobile phone about the incident. 
The parents of the victim rushed back to home. When they 
reached the home, the victim narrated the entire story of the 
incident to her parents. A police complaint was lodged, and FIR 
(Ex. P-08) was registered.
3.2	 The victim was subjected to medical examination, statement 
under Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1978 was 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
399
Deepak Kumar Sahu v. State of Chhattisgarh
recorded and a criminal case was registered for the offences as 
above, which was tried before the Special Court culminating into 
conviction and sentence of the appellant upheld by the High Court.
3.3	 Amongst the witnesses examined by the prosecution in course 
of the trial, included the prosecutrix herself (PW-2), mother 
Alka (PW-1), father Mayaram (PW-3), brother Mayank (PW-9), 
Dushyantin (PW-14), Medical Officer, Dr. R.K. Pashi (PW-11), 
Dr. Kiran, Block Medical Officer (PW-17), Investigating Officer 
(PW-18).
4.	
Learned advocate Mr. Manish Kumar Saran, AOR appearing for the 
appellant assailed the judgment of the High Court primarily and mainly 
on three grounds, as highlighted from the memorandum of appeal 
and elaborated in course of submissions. It was contended that the 
prosecution had failed to establish its case beyond the reasonable 
doubt and that it was not possible to rule out the theory of innocence 
of the appellant. In this regard, it was submitted that the evidence 
of the prosecutrix could not be relied on and needed to be analysed 
with caution when the medical report was not categorical to confirm 
the offence of sexual assault and rape on the victim. Secondly, it 
was contended that there were contradiction between the evidence 
of the victim (PW-2) and her younger brother (PW-9). Lastly it was 
sought to be contended that the prosecution could not establish that 
the victim was minor on the date of commission of offence so as to 
attract the provisions of POCSO Act, 2012.
5.	
Dealing with the last contended aspect at the outset, that the 
prosecutrix was not shown to be minor, this contention is stated to 
be rejected. There was a cogent and reliable evidence in the nature 
of 8th standard marksheet of the victim which showed her date of 
birth to be 09.10.2002. The said marksheet was obtained by the 
investigating officer (PW-18) from the mother of the victim and he 
had testified about it in his evidence. The birth date of 09.10.2002 
was also corroborated by the evidence of the mother of the victim 
(PW-1) and father of the victim (PW-3) who stated that her daughter 
was less than 16 years of age. The trial court rightly recorded that 
on the date of the incidence which was 03.04.2018, the age of the 
victim was 15 years 5 months 24 days. 
5.1	 Before proceeding further, the evidence brought on record and 
appreciated by the court of the first instance and considered 
400
Supreme Court Reports
by the High Court may be briefly visited with. The prosecutrix 
herself deposed as PW-2. Her testimony weighed pivotal by 
the courts below, along with the other evidence, in establishing 
the commission of the offence.
5.2	 Looking at the evidence of the Prosecutrix with some elaboration, 
she stated that on that particular day, she and her younger 
brother Mayank were at home and that she had been serving 
lunch to her brother, at which time the accused whom she could 
recognized, came inside the house, sent away her brother to buy 
some chewing tobacco. She stated that thereafter the accused 
forced her to lay down on the cot which was in the porch of the 
house and gagged her mouth. She stated that after disrobing 
her, the accused committed a misdeed and raped her.
5.2.1.	The victim further stated that when her brother returned, 
seeing him, the accused ran away. After the incident, it 
was stated, she went to the house of her uncle in the 
neighbourhood and asked her sister named Dushyantin to 
give her mobile, using which she contacted cousin brother 
Khomendra who had gone with her parents at Kareti 
village, and informed him about what has happened. She 
stated that after her parents came back, she informed 
the all about the incident. They went to the police station 
to get the complaint registered. The report to the police 
was made her own signature.
5.2.2.	In her cross-examination, the victim stated that her brother 
when questioned by her parents, told the parents that he 
saw both of them namely herself and the accused on the 
cot. She further stated that her father phoned his friend 
named Sudarshan Manikpuri, who also had come to the 
police station. She stated that at the police station, she 
was questioned orally.
5.3	 Noticing the other evidence would not be out of place. The 
brother-Mayank (PW-09) who was aged about 11 years and 
a child witness, came to be examined. He was put to certain 
questions to ensure that he was capable of giving evidence. He 
stated that when he came back from the school on the day of 
happening, except her sister nobody was at home. He stated 
that accused-Deepak who saw him coming inside their house 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
401
Deepak Kumar Sahu v. State of Chhattisgarh
sent him to buy chewing tobacco and when he came back with 
the tobacco he saw the accused gagging his sister’s mouth 
with his hand and had laid her down on the cot. It was stated 
that his sister at that time was seen without clothes and that 
the accused was also noticed in a similar state, off the trouser.
5.3.1.	The evidence of Dusyantin (PW-10) as well as that 
of Khomendra (PW-14) corroborated with what was 
testified by the victim that after the incident she has 
gone to the house of Dushyantin from where she using 
the mobile phone of Dushyantin, contacted and informed 
Khomendra, who in turn informed the parents of the victim 
about the incident and that knowing about the incident 
they had returned back.
5.3.2.	The mother of the victim, Alka Barsagarhe, (PW-1) and 
the father Myaram Barsagarhe (PW-3) were consistent 
in deposing, inter alia, that the accused-Deepak Kumar 
lived in their neighbour and they knew him, that on the 
date of incident they had gone to village Kareti to attend 
a funeral and that son of the brother-in-law Khomendra 
had also accompanied them along with other relatives. 
PW-1 stated that her husband informed her about the 
incident, upon being informed by Khomendra who had 
received the phone call from her daughter. Both in their 
depositions narrated the incident which was told to them 
by the victim-daughter, that the accused came inside 
the house and gagged her to lay her down on the bed 
in the porch of the house and raped her. PW-1 stated 
in terms in her cross examination that her daughter told 
her that the accused had committed misdeed with her 
after removing her inner clothes.
5.3.3.	The record of the medical examination obtained by the 
police post-complaint showed that there where no injury 
marks on the private parts of the victim. It was however, 
mentioned that the hymen was ruptured and healing 
up was indicated. The accused was found to be fully 
capable physically, mentally and medically of having 
sexual intercourse as was stated by PW – 11. He in his 
cross-examination have stated that if the bath is taken 
402
Supreme Court Reports
and clean, the semen can be absent. PW-17, who was 
the Block Medical Officer has also stated that there where 
no external signs of injury marks or scratch marks on 
the genitals of the victim. 
5.4	 The evidence of the prosecutrix is highlighted in Para 5.2 to 
5.2.2 above is not is only clear and consistent in the narration 
of the incident, and natural as well. The sequence of events 
including her approaching the house of Dushyantin and through 
her mobile contacting her parents by talking to Khomendra etc. 
which facts were duly corroborated from the evidence of PW-1 
and PW-3 as well as PW -10 and PW-14. The facts relating to 
the actual commission of offence and attendant circumstances 
thereof matched in the testimony of prosecutrix (PW-2) and her 
brother, Mayank (PW-9).
5.4.1.	An attentive look at the evidence of the prosecutrix 
(PW-2) would reveal that her testimony in narrating the 
incident and to describe what happened with her, is 
natural. Even when read independently, excepting the 
oral testimonies of others highlighted above, it inspires 
confidence and veracity for its clarity and consistency. 
The contention that non-availability of emphatic medical 
evidence about occurrence of physical intercourse and 
absence of external injury marks make it imperative to 
doubt and disregard the evidence of the prosecutrix, 
could hardly be countenanced. 
5.5	 In cases of offences committed under Section 376, IPC, when 
the story of the victim girl as told in the evidence is found credit-
worthy, the apparent insufficiency of medical evidence pitted 
against acceptable testimony of the victim, the latter would 
prevail. In State of Punjab vs. Gurmit Singh [(1996) 2 SCC 
384] it was observed: 
In the absence of injury on the private part of the 
prosecutrix, it cannot be concluded that the incident 
had not taken place or the sexual intercourse was 
committed with the consent of the prosecutrix. The 
prosecutrix being a small child of about nine years 
of age, there could be no question of her giving 
consent to sexual intercourse. The absence of injuries 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
403
Deepak Kumar Sahu v. State of Chhattisgarh
on the private part of the prosecutrix can be of no 
consequence in the facts and circumstances of the 
present case.
(Para 16)
5.5.1.	In State of Himachal Pradesh vs. Manga Singh, 
[(2019) 16 SCC 759], which was also a case in relation 
to the offence committed under Section 376, IPC where 
the prosecutrix was minor girl aged 9 years, she was 
staying in her aunt’s house pursuing her studies. When 
the offence of rape was committed against her, she 
narrated the story to her teacher. The High Court gave 
the benefit of doubt to the accused on the ground, inter 
alia, that the medical evidence of the doctor was not 
conclusive to hold that the prosecutrix was subjected to 
sexual intercourse.
5.5.2.	This Court observed that if the evidence of the victim 
does not suffer from any basic infirmities and the factor 
of probability does not render it unworthy evidence, 
the conviction could base solely on the evidence of the 
prosecutrix. It was further observed that as a general rule 
there is no reason to insist on the corroboration accept 
in certain cases, it was stated.
5.5.3.	The medical evidence may not be available in which 
circumstance, solitary testimony of the prosecutrix could 
be sufficient to base the conviction. 
“The conviction can be sustained on the sole 
testimony of the prosecutrix, if it inspires 
confidence. The conviction can be based solely 
on the solitary evidence of the prosecutrix 
and no corroboration be required unless there 
are compelling reasons which necessitate 
the courts to insist for corroboration of her 
statement. Corroboration of the testimony of 
the prosecutrix is not a requirement of law; 
but a guidance of prudence under the given 
facts and circumstances. Minor contractions or 
404
Supreme Court Reports
small discrepancies should not be a ground for 
throwing the evidence of the prosecutrix.” 
(Para 11) 
5.5.4.	It may be true that in the present case the evidence 
of the medical officer (PW-17) spoke about absence 
of external injury marks on the genitals of the victim. 
However, the proposition that the corroboration from the 
medical evidence is not sine qua non when the cogent 
evidence of the victim is available, was reiterated in a 
recent judgement of this Court in Lok Mal alias Loku vs. 
State of Uttar Pradesh, [(2025) 4 SCC 470], observed:
“Merely because in the medical evidence, there 
are no major injury marks, this merely cannot 
a be a reason to discard the otherwise reliable 
evidence of the prosecutrix. It is not necessary 
that in each and every case where rape is 
alleged there has to be an injury to the private 
parts of the victim and it depends on the facts 
and circumstances of a particular case. We 
reiterate that absence of injuries on the private 
parts of the victim is not always fatal to the case 
of the prosecution.
(Para 4)
5.5.5.	Akin to the facts of the present case, it was stated in 
Lok Mal (supra), according to the version of the 
prosecutrix, that the accused overpowered her and 
pushed her to bed in spite of her resistance and gagged 
her mouth using a piece of cloth. Thus, considering 
this very aspect, it is possible that there were no major 
injury marks. The appellant made an attempt to raise the 
defence of false implication, however, he was unable to 
support his defence by any cogent evidence.
5.5.6.	The credible and reliable evidence of prosecutrix could 
not be jettisoned for want of corroboration including the 
corroboration by medical report or evidence. The Court 
observed in Manga Singh (supra) that “in absence of 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
405
Deepak Kumar Sahu v. State of Chhattisgarh
injury on the private part of the prosecutrix, it cannot be 
concluded that the incident had not taken place or the 
sexual intercourse was committed with the consent of 
the prosecutrix”. It was stated that it is well settled that in 
the cases of rape it is not always necessary that external 
injury is to be found on the body of the victim.
5.5.7.	In Wahid Khan vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, [(2010) 2 
SCC 9], this Court repelled the contention of the appellant 
that since the hymen of the prosecutrix was found to be 
intact, it cannot be said that an offence of rape has been 
committed. The Court refuse to accept such contention in 
light of the definition of offence of rape in Section 375 of 
the Indian Penal Code. It was further observed that it is 
the consistent view of this Court that even the slightest 
penetration is sufficient to make out an offence of rape.
5.6	 It is an opt-reiterated dictum of law that in cases of rape, the 
testimony of the prosecutrix alone may be sufficient and sole 
evidence of the victim, when cogent and consistent, could be 
properly used to arrive at a finding of the guilt. In the State of 
Himachal Pradesh vs. Manga Singh, (2019) 16 SCC 759, 
this Court in terms stated that conviction can be rested on the 
testimony of the prosecutrix alone. 
The conviction can be sustained on the sole 
testimony of the prosecutrix, if it inspires confidence. 
The conviction can be based solely on the solitary 
evidence of the prosecutrix and no corroboration be 
required unless there are compelling reasons which 
necessitate the courts to insist for corroboration of 
her statement. Corroboration of the testimony of the 
prosecutrix is not a requirement of law, but a guidance 
of prudence under the given facts and circumstances. 
Minor contractions or small discrepancies should 
not be a ground for throwing the evidence of the 
prosecutrix.”
(Para 10)
5.6.1.	It was further asserted that corroboration is not an 
essential requirement for conviction in the cases of rape.
406
Supreme Court Reports
It is well settled by a catena of decisions of the 
Supreme Court that corroboration is not a sine 
qua non for conviction in a rape case. If the 
evidence of the victim does not suffer from any 
basic infirmity and the “probabilities factor” does 
not render it unworthy of credence. As a general 
rule, there is no reason to insist on corroboration 
except from medical evidence. However, having 
regard to the circumstances of the case, medical 
evidence may not be available. In such cases, 
solitary testimony of the prosecutrix would be 
sufficient to base the conviction, if it inspires the 
confidence of the court.
(Para 11)
5.6.2.	In Gurmit Singh (supra) it was observed to reiterate that 
in all cases, the corroboration to the statements made 
by the victim in her evidence could not be insisted upon 
as a rule of thumb:
In cases involving sexual molestation, supposed 
considerations which have no material effect 
on the veracity of the prosecution case or 
even discrepancies in the statement of the 
prosecutrix should not, unless the discrepancies 
are such which are of fatal nature, be allowed 
to throw out an otherwise reliable prosecution 
case. The inherent bashfulness of the females 
and the tendency to conceal outrage of sexual 
aggression are factors which the courts should 
not overlook.
(Para 8)
5.6.3.	It was asserted that only compelling reasons would justify 
rejection of testimony of a rape victim, and not otherwise:
“….the courts should find no difficulty to act 
on the testimony of a victim of sexual assault 
alone to convict an accused where her testimony 
inspires confidence and is found to be reliable. 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
407
Deepak Kumar Sahu v. State of Chhattisgarh
Seeking corroboration of her statement before 
relying upon the same, as a rule, in such cases 
amounts to adding insult to injury…..”
(Para 8)
5.6.4.	From a recent decision in Raju alias Umakant vs. State 
of Madhya Pradesh, (2025 SCC OnLine SC 997), 
following observations could be noticed:
“…….a woman or a girl subjected to sexual 
assault is not an accomplice but a victim of 
another person’s lust and it will be improper and 
undesirable to test her evidence with suspicion. 
All that the law mandates is that the Court should 
be alive to and conscious of the fact that it is 
dealing with the evidence of a person who is 
interested in the outcome of charge levelled by 
her and if after keeping that aspect in mind if the 
Court is thereafter satisfied that the evidence is 
trustworthy, there is nothing that can stop the 
Court from acting on the sole testimony of the 
prosecutrix. [See State of Rajasthan v. N.K. 
the Accused, (2000) 5 SCC 30, Rameshwar v. 
State of Rajasthan, 1951 SCC 1213, State 
of Maharashtra v. Chandraprakash Kewal 
Chand Jain, (1990) 1 SCC 550, State of 
Punjab v. Gurmit Singh, (1996) 2 SCC 384]”
(Para 18)
5.6.5.	As early as in State of Maharashtra vs. Chandraprakash 
Kewalchand Jain, [(1990) 1 SCC 550], this court 
observed that the prosecutrix of a sex offence cannot be 
put on a par with the accomplice, it was further observed 
that she is a victim of crime. The Evidence Act nowhere 
says that her evidence cannot be accepted unless it 
is corroborated in material particulars. It was further 
observed that evidence of a rape victim must receive 
the same weight as is attached to an injured in cases of 
physical violence. It was stated that there is no rule of 
408
Supreme Court Reports
law or practice incorporated in the Evidence Act similar to 
illustration (b) to Section 114 of the Evidence Act which 
may require it to look for corroboration.
5.7	 The last submission on behalf of the appellant that there were 
discrepancies in the evidences of victim (PW-2) and her brother 
(PW-11) has no room to stand, for, no material discrepancy 
could be noticed by the Court on comparison of the evidence of 
the two witnesses. Even otherwise, discrepancies in evidence 
which are of minor nature not going to the root have to be 
ignored. This Court observed in Lok Mal alias Loku (supra) 
that in criminal jurisprudence the principle is that the evidence 
of prosecutrix in case of rape is of the same value as that of 
an injured witness and conviction can be made on the basis 
of the sole testimony of the prosecutrix, while reiterating this. 
5.7.1.	The sensitive approach and greater inclination to rely 
on the creditworthy evidence of the victim is guided 
by the aspect as observed in Bharwada Bhoginbhai 
Hirjibhai vs. State of Gujarat, [(1983) 3 SCC 217] it 
was observed thus:
In the Indian setting, refusal to act on the 
testimony of a victim of sexual assault in the 
absence of corroboration as a rule, is adding 
insult to injury. Why should the evidence of the 
girl or the woman who complains of rape or 
sexual molestation be viewed with the aid of 
spectacles fitted with lenses tinged with doubt, 
disbelief or suspicion?”
(Para 9)
5.7.2.	Insignificance of minor discrepancies was pointed out by 
this Court in State of Himachal Pradesh vs. Lekh Raj, 
[(2001) 1 SCC 247]. By referring to earlier judgment in 
Ousu Varghese vs. State of Kerala, [(1974) 3 SCC 767], 
it was observed that minor variation in the accounts of 
the witnesses are often the hallmark of the truth of their 
testimony and the discrepancies are found to be of minor 
character not going to the root of the prosecution story, 
they need not be given undue importance. 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
409
Deepak Kumar Sahu v. State of Chhattisgarh
5.7.3.	It was observed in Jagdish vs. State of Madhya 
Pradesh, [(1981) SCC (Crl.) 676], that mere congruity 
or consistency is not the sole test of truth of depositions. 
The discrepancies have to be such which could be 
characterized as material, which are not normal and of 
the nature not expected from the normal person. 
5.8	 There is no gainsaying that the Court should remain sensitive 
while dealing with the charges of sexual assault on the helpless 
woman. In State of Rajasthan vs. N.K. The Accused, [(2000) 
5 SCC 30], this Court observed that “an unmerited acquittal 
encourages wolves in the society being on the prowl for easy 
prey, more so when the victim of crime are helpless females.” 
Similar was expressed in Gurmit Singh (supra) that the rapist 
not only violates the victim’s privacy and personal integrity, but 
inevitably causes serious psychological as well as physical 
harm in the process. It was stated that the rape is not merely 
a physical assault and subsequently destructs the whole 
personality of the victim. 
6.	
Evaluating the total evidence in light of the principles of law, 
evidentiary appreciation and application, with the evidence of the 
victim at the forefront, it has to be stated that victim’s evidence was 
entirely probable, natural and trustworthy who with lucidity narrated 
the whole incident about commission of offence against her by the 
accused. There exists no reason, much less compelling reasons, to 
disbelieve and discard her testimony. Her brother Mayank’s testimony 
as a child witness was rationally and logically supportive of what 
the prosecutrix narrated. The factum that the cot was in the porch 
and the victim was forced to lay there by the accused could also be 
called out from the evidence. 
6.1	 There was a consistency lent. The conduct of the victim, soon 
after the incident was quite natural, as she went to cousin 
sister’s neighbouring house and through her, informed cousin 
brother and her parents who were away.
6.2	 The crux of the incident, of accused overpowering the victim 
and committing forcible act by forcing her to the bed, could be 
clearly established from the totality of evidence adduced by the 
prosecution. Merely because the medical evidence was less 
corroborative and less supportive or absent in details or indictive 
410
Supreme Court Reports
of no external injuries. It in no way weakened the prosecution 
case. Sole testimony of the victim was a strong evidence to 
rely on along with available attendant evidence.
6.3	 The High Court was wholly justified in upholding and confirming 
the conviction and sentence awarded to the appellant-convict, 
by the trial court. 
7.	
The Criminal Appeal is accordingly dismissed. 
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan