[2025] 12 S.C.R. 258 : 2025 INSC 1373
Tuhin Kumar Biswas @ Bumba 
v. 
The State of West Bengal
(Criminal Appeal No. 5146 of 2025)
02 December 2025
[Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh and Manmohan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The Revision Petition filed by the Appellant-accused against the 
order dismissing the discharge application filed by the Appellant 
in FIR No.50/2020 dated 19.03.2020 lodged with police station 
Bidhannagar North, was dismissed by the High Court. Whether 
there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the Appellant-
accused for the offences alleged in the FIR.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.341, 354C, 506 – The complainant, an 
alleged tenant of A, one of the co-owners of the property filed 
a complaint/FIR u/ss.341, 354C, 506 of IPC – It was alleged 
that when the complainant along with her friend and workmen 
tried to enter the property, the Appellant-accused intimidated 
them and restrained them from entering the property – The 
complainant further alleged that the Appellant-accused 
intimidated the complainant by clicking her pictures and 
making her videos on his mobile without her consent and 
by doing so, he intruded upon her privacy and outraged her 
modesty – Chargesheet was filed – Application for discharge 
filed by the accused was dismissed by the Trial Court – 
Revision Petition against the order of the Trial Court was 
dismissed by the High Court – Correctness:
Held: At the stage of discharge, a strong suspicion suffices – 
However, a strong suspicion must be found on some material 
which can be translated into evidence at the stage of trial – FIR 
and chargesheet do not disclose an offence u/s.354C of IPC – 
Upon a perusal of the FIR and chargesheet on record, this Court 
is unable to conclude an offence u/s.354C of the IPC since there 
is no allegation in the FIR and chargesheet that the complainant 
* Author
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
259
Tuhin Kumar Biswas @ Bumba v. The State of West Bengal
was watched or captured by the appellant-accused while she 
was engaging in a ‘private act’ – Further, ingredients of criminal 
intimidation are not attracted – Except for the bald allegation that 
the Appellant-accused intimidated the complainant by clicking her 
photographs, the FIR and chargesheet are completely silent about 
the manner in which the complainant was threatened with any injury 
to her person or her property – Also, offence of wrongful restraint 
is not made out – In the present case, the right of the complainant 
to enter the property stems from the virtue of being a purported 
tenant of A – However, no material has been placed on record 
along with the chargesheet which indicates that the complainant 
was a tenant in the property at any point of time – In fact, the 
induction of the complainant as tenant in the property would have 
been in violation of the injunction passed by the Trial Court – This 
Court is of the opinion that all that the Appellant-accused did was 
to enforce what he bonafidely thought was his lawful right over the 
property in terms of the injunction order passed by the Trial Court – 
Consequently, this Court is of the view that criminal proceedings 
against the Appellant-accused for offences punishable u/ss.341, 
354C, 506 of IPC cannot be permitted to continue. [Paras 17, 19, 
20, 22, 25-27]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – Chargesheets – Framing 
of charges – Tendency of filing chargesheets and framing 
charges in matters where no strong suspicion is made out 
clogs the Judicial system:
Held: This Court would like to emphasise that where there is 
a pending civil dispute between the parties, the Police and the 
Criminal Courts must be circumspect in filing a chargesheet and 
framing charges respectively – In a society governed by rule of 
law, the decision to file a chargesheet should be based on the 
Investigating Officer’s determination of whether the evidence 
collected provides a reasonable prospect of conviction – The Police 
at the stage of filing of Chargesheet and the Criminal Court at the 
stage of framing of Charge must act as initial filters ensuring that 
only cases with a strong suspicion should proceed to the formal 
trial stage to maintain the efficiency and integrity of the judicial 
system – The tendency of filing chargesheets in matters where no 
strong suspicion is made out clogs the judicial system – It forces 
Judges, court staff, and prosecutors to spend time on trials that 
are likely to result in an acquittal – This diverts limited judicial 
260
Supreme Court Reports
resources from handling stronger, more serious cases, contributing 
to massive case backlogs – Undoubtedly, there can be no analysis 
at the charge framing stage as to whether the case would end in 
conviction or acquittal, but the fundamental principle is that the 
State should not prosecute citizens without a reasonable prospect 
of conviction, as it compromises the right to a fair process. [Para 28]
Case Law Cited
Ram Prakash Chadha v. State of UP [2024] 7 SCR 1155 : (2024) 10 
SCC 651; M.E. Shivalingamurthy v. Central Bureau of Investigation 
Bengaluru [2020] 1 SCR 794 : (2020) 2 SCC 768 – relied on.
Stree Atyachar Virodhi Parishad v. Dilip Nathumal Chordia [1989] 
1 SCR 560 : (1989) 1 SCC 715; P. Vijayan v. State of Kerala 
[2010] 2 SCR 78 : (2010) 2 SCC 398; Union of India v. Prafulla 
Kumar Samal [1979] 2 SCR 229 : (1979) 3 SCC 4 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Chargesheet; Framing charges; Civil Dispute; Pending civil dispute; 
Integrity of Judicial system; Conviction; Acquittal; Wrongul restraint; 
Section 341 of IPC; Criminal Intimidation; Section 506 of IPC; 
Section 354 of IPC; Voyeurism; Private Act; Privacy; Modesty; 
Stage of discharge; Injunction; Violation of injunction.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
5146 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 30.01.2024 of the High Court 
at Calcutta in CRR No. 3443 of 2023
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
V. Somnath Ghoshal, Anupama Chakraborty, Sahid Uddin Ahmed, 
Towseef Ahmad Dar, Ms. Zinat Sultana.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Kunal Mimani, Prashant Alai.
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
261
Tuhin Kumar Biswas @ Bumba v. The State of West Bengal
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Manmohan, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The present Appeal has been filed challenging the judgment dated 
30th January 2024 passed by the Calcutta High Court, whereby 
the revision petition filed by the Appellant-accused against the 
order dismissing the discharge application filed by the Appellant in 
FIR No.50/2020 dated 19th March 2020 lodged with police station 
Bidhannagar North, was dismissed.
FACTS
3.	
On 19th March 2020, the complainant-Ms. Mamta Agarwal, an alleged 
tenant of Mr. Amalendu Biswas, one of the co-owners of the property 
at CF-231, Sector I, Salt Lake, Kolkata 700064 (“the property”) filed a 
complaint/FIR under Sections 341, 354C, 506 of Indian Penal Code 
(‘IPC’). The complainant alleged that on 18th March 2020, when the 
complainant along with her friend and workmen tried to enter the 
property, the Appellant-accused intimidated them and restrained them 
from entering the property. The complainant further alleged that the 
Appellant-accused intimidated the complainant by clicking her pictures 
and making her videos on his mobile without her consent and by 
doing so, he intruded upon her privacy and outraged her modesty.
4.	
Upon completion of investigation, a chargesheet dated 16th August 
2020 was presented against the Appellant-accused for offences 
punishable under Sections 341, 354C and 506 of IPC. It is stated in 
the chargesheet that the complainant expressed her unwillingness to 
make a judicial statement. The relevant portion of the chargesheet 
in question is reproduced hereinbelow:-
“17. Brief facts of case: Bidhannagar North P.S. Case 
No:50/2020 Dated 19.03.2020 U/S 341/354C/506 IPC 
has been started on the basis of written Complaint of one 
Mamta Agarwal of I/B, Kustia Road, Kolkata – 700039. The 
fact in brief is that on 19.03.2020 at about 15.00 hrs. while 
she along with her friend were entering into the premise, 
262
Supreme Court Reports
located at CF-231, Sector-1, Salt Lake, Kolkata-700 064, 
PS BDN(N), they were restrained by one Tuhin Kr. Biswas 
@ Bumba. Some argument took place between them. 
Said Tuhin Kr. Biswas snapped some photographs and 
recorded video, which caused outrage of female modesty 
of the complainant. Being endorsed by IC, Bidhannagar 
North PS, I took up its investigation. 
During investigation all follow-up actions were taken. 
Notice u/s 41A Cr.P.C. was complied with by the accused 
but he didn’t surrender before Ld. Court. The complainant 
expressed her unwillingness to make judicial statement.
Discussed with IC, Bidhannagar North PS and considering 
all aspects, he opined to submit Charge Sheet in this case.
Hence, I do submit Charge sheet vide BDN(N) PS 
CS No.128/2020 Dated 16.08.2020 u/s 341/354C/506 
IPC against accused Tuhin Kr. Biswas @ Bumba S/O 
Bimanlendu Biswas of CF-231, Sector-1, Salt Lake 
Kolkata-700 064, PS-BDN(N) to stand his trial in the open 
Court of law.
The witnesses, noted in Col. No.14, will prove the charge 
during trial. They may kindly be summoned. Kept the 
complainant informed about the result of investigation.”
5.	
Thereafter, the Appellant-accused, who is son of one of the co-owners 
of the property in question filed an application seeking discharge, 
which was dismissed by the Trial Court vide order dated 29th August 
2023. The revision petition against the order dated 29th August 2023 
was dismissed by the learned Single Judge vide the impugned 
judgment. 
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
6.	
Learned counsel for the Appellant-accused stated that the two brothers 
(Mr. Bimalendu Biswas and Mr. Amalendu Biswas) are the joint 
owners of the property in question and one of the brothers, being Mr. 
Amalendu Biswas, had tried to dispossess the other brother without 
due process of law. He stated that said other brother, being father 
of the Appellant-accused, filed a civil suit being Title Suit No. 20 of 
2018 with respect to the property in question against Mr. Amalendu 
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
263
Tuhin Kumar Biswas @ Bumba v. The State of West Bengal
Biswas. He pointed out that vide order dated 29th November 2018, the 
learned Civil Judge directed the parties to maintain joint possession 
of the property as well as not to alienate the property and/or not to 
create any third-party interest in the property. He emphasized that 
the said injunction was prevalent on the date of the incident which 
led to filing of the FIR. The relevant portion of the injunction order 
dated 29th November 2018 is reproduced hereinbelow:-
“….Both the parties should maintain a joint possession in 
the suit property. Both parties are hereby restrained from 
disturbing the joint possession of the other in the suit 
property and from alienating the suit property or creating 3rd 
party interest in the suit property till disposal of the suit…”
7.	
He alleged that the FIR in question had been registered at the 
behest of Mr.Amalendu Biswas, who attempted to dispossess the 
Appellant-accused and his father from the property in violation of 
the injunction order passed by the Trial Court.
8.	
He contended that on the date of the incident, the complainant had 
entered the property with anti-social elements in a bid to dispossess 
the Appellant-accused’s father. He pointed out that the complainant-
Ms. Mamta Agarwal is a habitual offender and has been charged with 
offences under Sections 302 & 307 of IPC in one case, and offences 
under Sections 323, 341, 506(II) & 114 of IPC in another case. He 
emphasised that the complainant is not a tenant in the property. He 
further stated that in the chargesheet, the investigating agency has 
not adduced any document pertaining to tenancy of the complainant. 
9.	
He alleged that the other side, i.e., Mr. Amalendu Biswas was in the 
process of creating third-party rights in violation of the injunction and 
mere protest against creation of such third-party rights by the other 
litigant over the property did not attract Section 341 or 506 of IPC. 
10.	 He stated that the allegations in the FIR did not disclose the 
commission of an offence under Section 354C of IPC. He stated 
that no photographs or seizure had been placed on record to 
substantiate the allegations of voyeurism. He submitted that despite 
the finding given by the learned Single Judge that the allegation in 
the FIR did not disclose any offence under Section 354C of IPC, 
the learned Single Judge did not quash the FIR or discharge the 
Appellant qua the said offence. He stated that the complaint was 
264
Supreme Court Reports
silent with respect to the threatening language allegedly uttered by 
the Appellant-accused. 
11.	 He stated that there are no statements under Section 161 of Code of 
Criminal Procedure (‘Cr.P.C’). of the alleged friend accompanying the 
complainant or her workmen. He further stated that the complainant 
had also expressed her unwillingness to get her statement recorded 
under Section 164 of Cr.P.C., thereby indicating the falsity of her 
allegations in the FIR.
12.	 He contended that the allegations in the FIR are false and even if 
they are accepted at face value, no case is made out against the 
Appellant-accused.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT-STATE
13.	 Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the Respondent-State 
stated that the complainant was only a prospective tenant. He pointed 
out that in his statement, the other co-owner of the property, being 
Mr. Amalendu Biswas had stated that the complainant had come 
to see the ground floor of the property. He emphasized that there 
was sufficient material on record which made out a prima facie case 
against the Appellant-accused for offences punishable under Sections 
341 and 506 of IPC. He relied upon the following observations and 
findings of the High Court in the impugned Judgment:-
“14. With regard to truthfulness, sufficiency or admissibility 
of the charge under Section 341/506 of the IPC made in 
the FIR, it cannot be said to be a matter falling within the 
domain of exercising jurisdiction under Section 227 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure at the time of consideration 
of a prayer for discharge.
15. On careful scrutiny of the order impugned, I find no 
reason to interfere with the order whereby Ld. Magistrate 
refused to discharge the accused and fixed a date for 
framing of charge and hearing of the petition.
16. Thus, the revision application being no. CRR 3443 of 
2023 is hereby dismissed. Ld. Trial Court is directed to 
frame charge, keeping an eye on the observation made 
by this Court after giving an opportunity of hearing to both 
the parties.”
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
265
Tuhin Kumar Biswas @ Bumba v. The State of West Bengal
REASONING
ABSENT A STRONG SUSPICION, AN ACCUSED CAN BE 
DISCHARGED
14.	 Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, this Court is of the 
view that before proceeding with the matter, it is essential to outline 
the legal principles to be kept in mind by the Court while deciding 
an application seeking discharge.
15.	 This Court has recently in Ram Prakash Chadha v. State of UP 
(2024) 10 SCC 651, cited with approval earlier decisions of this Court 
in Stree Atyachar Virodhi Parishad v. Dilip Nathumal Chordia, 
(1989) 1 SCC 715; P. Vijayan v. State of Kerala, (2010) 2 SCC 
398; and Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal, (1979) 3 SCC 
4 as under:- 
“21. In the decision in Stree Atyachar Virodhi Parishad v. 
Dilip Nathumal Chordia [Stree Atyachar Virodhi Parishad v. 
Dilip Nathumal Chordia, (1989) 1 SCC 715 : 1989 SCC 
(Cri) 285] , this Court held that the word “ground” in Section 
227CrPC, did not mean a ground for conviction, but a 
ground for putting the accused on trial.
22. In P. Vijayan v. State of Kerala [P. Vijayan v. State of 
Kerala, (2010) 2 SCC 398 : (2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 1488] , 
after extracting Section 227CrPC, this Court in paras 10 
and 11 held thus: (SCC pp. 401-402)
“10. … If two views are possible and one of them 
gives rise to suspicion only, as distinguished from 
grave suspicion, the trial Judge will be empowered 
to discharge the accused and at this stage he is 
not to see whether the trial will end in conviction or 
acquittal. Further, the words “not sufficient ground for 
proceeding against the accused” clearly show that the 
Judge is not a mere post office to frame the charge 
at the behest of the prosecution, but has to exercise 
his judicial mind to the facts of the case in order to 
determine whether a case for trial has been made 
out by the prosecution. In assessing this fact, it is 
not necessary for the court to enter into the pros and 
266
Supreme Court Reports
cons of the matter or into a weighing and balancing of 
evidence and probabilities which is really the function 
of the court, after the trial starts.
11. At the stage of Section 227, the Judge has merely 
to sift the evidence in order to find out whether or not 
there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the 
accused. In other words, the sufficiency of ground 
would take within its fold the nature of the evidence 
recorded by the police or the documents produced 
before the court which ex facie disclose that there 
are suspicious circumstances against the accused 
so as to frame a charge against him.”
23. In para 13 in P. Vijayan case [P. Vijayan v. State of 
Kerala, (2010) 2 SCC 398 : (2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 1488], this 
Court took note of the principles enunciated earlier by this 
Court in Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal [Union 
of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal, (1979) 3 SCC 4 : 1979 
SCC (Cri) 609] which reads thus: (Prafulla Kumar Samal 
case [Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal, (1979) 3 
SCC 4 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 609] , SCC p. 9, para 10)
“10. … (1) That the Judge while considering the 
question of framing the charges under Section 227 
of the Code has the undoubted power to sift and 
weigh the evidence for the limited purpose of finding 
out whether or not a prima facie case against the 
accused has been made out.
(2) Where the materials placed before the Court 
disclose grave suspicion against the accused which 
has not been properly explained the Court will be 
fully justified in framing a charge and proceeding 
with the trial.
(3) The test to determine a prima facie case would 
naturally depend upon the facts of each case 
and it is difficult to lay down a rule of universal 
application. By and large however if two views are 
equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the 
evidence produced before him while giving rise to 
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
267
Tuhin Kumar Biswas @ Bumba v. The State of West Bengal
some suspicion but not grave suspicion against the 
accused, he will be fully within his right to discharge 
the accused.
(4) That in exercising his jurisdiction under Section 
227 of the Code the Judge which under the present 
Code is a senior and experienced court cannot 
act merely as a post office or a mouthpiece of 
the prosecution, but has to consider the broad 
probabilities of the case, the total effect of the 
evidence and the documents produced before the 
Court, any basic infirmities appearing in the case 
and so on. This however does not mean that the 
Judge should make a roving enquiry into the pros 
and cons of the matter and weigh the evidence as 
if he was conducting a trial.”
16.	 In M.E. Shivalingamurthy vs. Central Bureau of Investigation 
Bengaluru, (2020) 2 SCC 768, this Court has held as under:-
“17.This is an area covered by a large body of case law. 
We refer to a recent judgment which has referred to the 
earlier decisions viz. P. Vijayan v. State of Kerala and 
discern the following principles:
17.1. If two views are possible and one of them gives 
rise to suspicion only as distinguished from grave 
suspicion, the trial Judge would be empowered to 
discharge the accused.
17.2. The trial Judge is not a mere post office to frame 
the charge at the instance of the prosecution.
17.3. The Judge has merely to sift the evidence in order 
to find out whether or not there is sufficient ground for 
proceeding. Evidence would consist of the statements 
recorded by the police or the documents produced before 
the Court.
17.4. If the evidence, which the Prosecutor proposes to 
adduce to prove the guilt of the accused, even if fully 
accepted before it is challenged in cross-examination or 
rebutted by the defence evidence, if any, “cannot show 
268
Supreme Court Reports
that the accused committed offence, then, there will be no 
sufficient ground for proceeding with the trial”.
17.5. It is open to the accused to explain away the materials 
giving rise to the grave suspicion.
17.6. The court has to consider the broad probabilities, the 
total effect of the evidence and the documents produced 
before the court, any basic infirmities appearing in the case 
and so on. This, however, would not entitle the court to 
make a roving inquiry into the pros and cons.
17.7. At the time of framing of the charges, the probative 
value of the material on record cannot be gone into, and 
the material brought on record by the prosecution, has to 
be accepted as true.
17.8. There must exist some materials for entertaining the 
strong suspicion which can form the basis for drawing up 
a charge and refusing to discharge the accused.
18. The defence of the accused is not to be looked into 
at the stage when the accused seeks to be discharged 
under Section 227 CrPC (see State of J&K v. Sudershan 
Chakkar). The expression, “the record of the case”, 
used in Section 227 CrPC, is to be understood as the 
documents and the articles, if any, produced by the 
prosecution. The Code does not give any right to the 
accused to produce any document at the stage of framing 
of the charge. At the stage of framing of the charge, the 
submission of the accused is to be confined to the material 
produced by the police (see State of Orissa v. Debendra 
Nath Padhi).”
(emphasis supplied)
17.	 Consequently, at the stage of discharge, a strong suspicion suffices. 
However, a strong suspicion must be found on some material which 
can be translated into evidence at the stage of trial.
18.	 Keeping in view the aforesaid principles of law, this Court will have 
to assess as to whether there are sufficient grounds for proceeding 
against the Appellant-accused for the offences alleged in the FIR. 
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
269
Tuhin Kumar Biswas @ Bumba v. The State of West Bengal
FIR AND CHARGESHEET DO NOT DISCLOSE AN OFFENCE 
UNDER SECTION 354C IPC
19.	 Section 354C of IPC defines voyeurism as an act of a man watching 
or capturing the image of a woman engaging in a ‘private act’ in 
circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of not 
being observed. ‘Private act’ has been defined in Explanation 1 as 
an act including “an act of watching carried out in a place which, in 
the circumstances, would reasonably be expected to provide privacy 
and where the victim’s genitals, posterior or breasts are exposed 
or covered only in underwear; or the victim is using a lavatory; or 
the victim is doing a sexual act that is not of a kind ordinarily done 
in public.”
20.	 Upon a perusal of the FIR and chargesheet on record, this Court is 
unable to conclude the same disclose an offence under Section 354C 
of the IPC since there is no allegation in the FIR and chargesheet that 
the complainant was watched or captured by the Appellant-accused 
while she was engaging in a ‘private act’. The learned Single Judge, 
in the impugned judgment, has concluded with respect to the offence 
under Section 354C as under:-
“11. Allegation made in the written complaint, in my 
opinion, did not disclose any offence under Section 
354C…
12. From the bare reading of the aforesaid provision, it 
is clearly intelligible that the allegation of clicking 
pictures and making video made in the written 
complaint cannot be said to be an offence within the 
meaning of Section 354C of IPC.”
(emphasis supplied)
21.	 Consequently, the learned Single Judge in the impugned order itself 
concluded that the allegations in the FIR and the material on record 
did not disclose an offence under Section 354C of IPC. 
INGREDIENTS OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION ARE NOT 
ATTRACTED
22.	 Further, in order to constitute an offence of criminal intimidation 
punishable under Section 506 of IPC, it must be shown that the person 
270
Supreme Court Reports
charged, threatened another with injury to his person, reputation 
or property or to the person or reputation of anyone in whom that 
person is interested, with intent to cause alarm. Except for the bald 
allegation that the Appellant-accused intimidated the complainant by 
clicking her photographs, the FIR and chargesheet are completely 
silent about the manner in which the complainant was threatened with 
any injury to her person or her property. The words, if any, uttered by 
the complainant are not mentioned in the FIR. Additionally, as stated 
above, the complainant or her associates never made a statement to 
substantiate her allegations. Consequently, in the present case, even 
if the allegations in the FIR are taken at face value, the ingredients 
of offence of criminal intimidation are not attracted. 
OFFENCE OF WRONGFUL RESTRAINT IS NOT MADE OUT
23.	 Section 341 of IPC provides punishment for the offence of wrongful 
restraint, which has been defined in Section 339 of IPC as under: 
“339. Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to 
prevent that person from proceeding in any direction in 
which that person has a right to proceed, is said wrongfully 
to restrain that person.
Exception— The obstruction of a private way over land 
or water which a person in good faith believes himself to 
have a lawful right to obstruct, is not an offence within the 
meaning of this section.”
24.	 The ingredients essential to constitute an offence of wrongful restraint 
are that there should be an obstruction which prevents a person 
from proceeding in any direction in which the person has a right to 
proceed. The exception to the offence of wrongful restraint provides 
that no offence of wrongful restraint is committed if the person 
alleged of obstruction, in good faith, believes that he has a lawful 
right to obstruct. Therefore, the evidence required to establish the 
offence of wrongful restraint is that the person alleging obstruction 
has a right to proceed in such direction and the person obstructing 
has no lawful right to cause obstruction. 
25.	 In the present case, the perusal of the FIR reveals that the alleged 
offences were committed when the complainant attempted to enter 
the property. The right of the complainant to enter the property 
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
271
Tuhin Kumar Biswas @ Bumba v. The State of West Bengal
stems from the virtue of being a purported tenant of Mr. Amalendu 
Biswas. However, no material has been placed on record along with 
the chargesheet which indicates that the complainant was a tenant 
in the property at any point of time. Surprisingly, the complainant 
has not even given a statement in pursuance to her complaint. 
On the contrary, the said Amalendu Biswas in his statement has 
stated that the complainant had come to see the property, meaning 
thereby that the complainant was not a tenant in the property but 
only a prospective tenant when the FIR was registered. Therefore, 
the material on record indicates that on the date of the alleged 
offence, the complainant had no right to enter the property. In fact, 
the induction of the complainant as tenant in the property would 
have been in violation of the injunction passed by the Trial Court. 
26.	 In view of the aforesaid, this Court is of the opinion that all that the 
Appellant-accused did was to enforce what he bonafidely thought 
was his lawful right over the property in terms of the injunction order 
passed by the Trial Court. This Court is also of the opinion that the 
allegations in the FIR and the material on record at best constitute 
a cause of action for filing a suit for injunction and/or an application 
seeking modification of the interim order already in subsistence or 
an application for the relief of ingress and egress in the pending suit.
27.	 Consequently, this Court is of the view that criminal proceedings 
against the Appellant-accused for offences punishable under 
Sections 341, 354C, 506 of IPC cannot be permitted to continue.
TENDENCY OF FILING CHARGESHEETS AND FRAMING 
CHARGES IN MATTERS WHERE NO STRONG SUSPICION IS 
MADE OUT CLOGS THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM
28.	 Before parting with this case, this Court would like to emphasise 
that where there is a pending civil dispute between the parties, 
the Police and the Criminal Courts must be circumspect in filing a 
chargesheet and framing charges respectively. In a society governed 
by rule of law, the decision to file a chargesheet should be based 
on the Investigating Officer’s determination of whether the evidence 
collected provides a reasonable prospect of conviction. The Police 
at the stage of filing of Chargesheet and the Criminal Court at the 
stage of framing of Charge must act as initial filters ensuring that 
only cases with a strong suspicion should proceed to the formal trial 
272
Supreme Court Reports
stage to maintain the efficiency and integrity of the judicial system. 
The tendency of filing chargesheets in matters where no strong 
suspicion is made out clogs the judicial system. It forces Judges, court 
staff, and prosecutors to spend time on trials that are likely to result 
in an acquittal. This diverts limited judicial resources from handling 
stronger, more serious cases, contributing to massive case backlogs. 
Undoubtedly, there can be no analysis at the charge framing stage 
as to whether the case would end in conviction or acquittal, but the 
fundamental principle is that the State should not prosecute citizens 
without a reasonable prospect of conviction, as it compromises the 
right to a fair process.
29.	 In the present case, the Police and the Trial Court should have been 
cognizant that as there was a pending civil dispute with regard to the 
property in question as well as a prior subsisting injunction order and 
the complainant had refused to make any judicial statement, strong 
suspicion founded on legally tenable material/evidence was absent.
CONCLUSION
30.	 Keeping in view the aforesaid, the present Appeal is allowed and the 
impugned Judgment and Order is set aside as well as the Appellant-
accused is discharged from G.R. Case No. 223 of 2020 (arising out 
of Bidhannagar North Police Station FIR No. 50 of 2020). 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan