[2025] 9 S.C.R. 528 : 2025 INSC 1085
Maha Mineral Mining & Benefication Pvt. Ltd. 
v. 
Madhya Pradesh Power Generating Co. Ltd. & Anr.
(Civil Appeal No. 11726 of 2025)
09 September 2025
[Surya Kant and Joymalya Bagchi, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the decision of the High Court to uphold 
the appellant-bidder’s disqualification under Clause 5(D) for not 
furnishing Joint Venture agreement justified; and whether the 
appellant would have stood disqualified since its washeries had 
been exclusively committed to the State Mining Corporation.
Headnotes†
Tender – Notice inviting tender – Clause (5)D and Clause (5)B –  
Disqualification – 1st respondent invited Tender for coal 
beneficiation and managing logistics for Thermal Power 
Project – Appellant and others submitted their bid – However, 
the appellant-bidder was disqualified during technical 
evaluation by the Committee due to non-submission of 
credentials as per Clause No.(5)D of the NIT-non-filing of Joint 
Venture agreement – Decision of the Committee challenged by 
the appellant – High Court upheld the disqualification of the 
appellant by the Committee for non-compliance of Clause 5(D) 
of the NIT and also held that even if the JV agreement had 
been submitted, the appellant would have stood disqualified 
since its washeries had been exclusively committed to the 
State Mining Corporation – Correctness:
Held: 1st respondent acted contrary to the terms of the NIT and 
unfairly rejected the appellant’s bid for non-production of JV 
agreement although Clause 5(D) did not prescribe production of 
such agreement as mandatory to rely on past-experience of such 
consortium in which the bidder had a defined proportionate share – 
Decision of the Committee, upheld by the High Court as per Clause 
5(D) liable to be set aside – Issue as regards washery capacity is 
a contentious one and ought not to have been decided by the High 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
529
Maha Mineral Mining & Benefication Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Madhya Pradesh Power Generating Co. Ltd. & Anr.
Court without giving opportunity to the appellant to controvert the 
same – High Court also lost sight of the fact that the Committee 
had not adverted to this issue and it was impermissible for it to 
travel beyond the reasons given by the Committee and disqualify 
the appellant – Allotment of work order to 2nd respondent has been 
made subject to the outcome of this proceeding – Matter remand 
for a fresh consideration whether appellant had requisite spare 
washing capacity as per Clause 5(B) of the NIT and the validity 
of the work order in favour of the 2nd respondent in light of such 
decision – Impugned judgment and order of the High Court set 
aside. [Paras 20, 21, 24-26]
List of Keywords
Disqualification; Clause 5(D) of the NIT; Non furnishing JV 
agreement; Washeries; Tender; Notice inviting tender; Clause 
(5)B of the NIT; Coal beneficiation and managing logistics for 
Thermal Power Project; Technical evaluation by the Committee; 
Non-submission of credentials; Joint Venture agreement; State 
Mining Corporation.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 11726  
of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 06.01.2025 of the High Court 
of Madhya Pradesh Principal Seat at Jabalpur in WP No. 18286 
of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Narender Hooda, Sr. Adv., Gagan Sanghi, Mrs. Farah Hashmi, 
Santosh Ghate, Rameshwar Prasad Goyal.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Bijender Chahar, A.S.G., Shyam Divan, Balbir Singh, Arpan Pawar, 
Sr. Advs., Kartik Seth, Ms. Ranjeeta Rohatgi, Nikhil Nasre, Raghav 
Sharma, Ms. Aditi Mishra, K.M Abish, Manan, Ms. Shrika Gautam, 
Himanshu Satija, Harsh Saxena, Chiranjeev Sharma, Pulkit Pawar, 
Mrs. Neha Mehta Satija.
530
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
1.	
Leave granted.
Factual Matrix
2.	
In response to Notice Inviting Tender1 dated 17.05.2024, issued 
by the 1st respondent for the purpose of run-of-mine (ROM) coal 
beneficiation and managing logistics from Western Coalfields Ltd.2 
(Nagpur area) sources for Shree Singaji Thermal Power Project, 
Khandwa (Madhya Pradesh), the appellant and two others, namely 
the 2nd respondent3 and one M/s NN Global Mercantile Pvt. Ltd. had 
submitted their bid.
3.	
As NN Global Mercantile Pvt. Ltd. could not furnish earnest money 
deposit, only the appellant and the 2nd respondent remained in 
the fray. On 04.07.2024, the Tender Evaluation Committee4 while 
referring to Clause 5(D)5 of the NIT rejected the appellant’s technical 
bid holding as follows – 
1	
ID 2024_MPPGC_341576_1, hereinafter referred to as “NIT”. 
2	
Hereinafter “WCL”.
3	
Rukhmai Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.
4	
Hereinafter referred to as “The Committee”.
5	
Clause 5(D): “Past Experience: Copies of successfully executed orders (including part executed) in the 
name of bidder for same or similar work {similar work means coal lifting from mines of CIL subsidiaries or 
SCCL area, coal beneficiation (through wet process), movement of washed coal by road from washery 
to railway siding and movement of washed coal through Railways with experience in liaisoning with 
Railways/ CIL subsidiaries or SCCL area, i.e., arranging rakes, dispatches coal from own or leased 
Private siding or Goods shed Railways siding by loading of washed coal into railway wagons through 
own arrangement with monitoring the rake movement etc. up to the destination Power house}. Bidder 
is allowed to use past experience of their previous Consortium or JV (proportionate to its share 
in that consortium if defined in the Consortium Agreement, otherwise, lead partner if not defined 
in the Consortium) to meet out the past experience criteria of the tender. The order copies should 
indicate the above w/ork for 4 Lakh MT (4,00,000 MT) quantity or more in stale Owned Power Generating 
Companies or Other Captive Power Utilities of PSU or NTPC or Govt. Industries / Departments or Semi 
Govt. Industries / Departments or PSUs or Nodal Agency of any PSUs in India executed in last five 
years ending with initial date of opening of bid are to be uploaded. This order execution should be within 
a period of twelve (12) months. It may be through single or multiple orders (in parallel), but in case of 
multiple orders; these should be within a single span of time period of twelve (12) months.
1. The work execution certificate by the customers along-with self-attested un-priced copies of 
aforesaid work order(s) should be submitted. 
2. For Past performance certificates - If worked with MPEB/ MPSEB/ MPPGCL in past for similar work, 
then it is mandatory to provide Satisfactory Performance Certificate for the same. Failing this, the offer 
shall not be considered.” (emphasis supplied)
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
531
Maha Mineral Mining & Benefication Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Madhya Pradesh Power Generating Co. Ltd. & Anr.
“As per Clause No. 5(D) “Past experience criteria” of 
NIT, bidder is allowed to use past experience of their 
previous Consortium or JV (proportionate to its share in 
that consortium if defined in the Consortium Agreement, 
otherwise, lead partner if not defined in the Consortium) 
to meet out the past experience criteria of the tender.
The firm has used the credentials of their consortium  
M/s Hind-Maha-Mineral LLP for meeting out the past 
experience criteria. However, Agreement of the Consortium/
JV is not submitted to substantiate the share of the 
bidder in that consortium. Bidder is disqualified due to  
non-submission of credentials as per Clause No. (5)D of 
the NIT.”
4.	
Appellant challenged the decision of the Committee before the High 
Court of Madhya Pradesh.6 Appellant contended neither Clause 
5(D) nor any terms of the NIT expressly required a bidder who 
was relying on past-experience of a previous consortium or joint 
venture7 to produce the JV agreement itself to demonstrate its 
proportionate share in the consortium. In terms of Clause 5(D) it 
had submitted a work execution certificate from Maharashtra State 
Mining Corporation8 which inter alia stated that the appellant was 
45% Joint Venture/Consortium Partner of M/s. Hind Maha Mineral 
LLP vide the JV agreement dated 02.12.2019 and had executed 
similar work in respect of WCL command for the period 05.03.2021 
to 05.03.2024. It was further clarified the JV agreement had been 
submitted before MSMC.
5.	
In case of doubt, 1st respondent could have verified the correctness 
of the certificate from MSMC or called upon the appellant to furnish 
the JV agreement. On the contrary, the 1st respondent arbitrarily 
rejected the technical bid on the ground the JV agreement had not 
been furnished. 
6.	
1st respondent contradicted such stance and contended in the event 
any bidder was seeking to rely on past-experience of a previous 
consortium/JV, submission of the JV agreement was implicit in 
6	
Writ Petition No. 18286/2024.
7	
Hereinafter referred to as “JV”.
8	
Hereinafter referred to as “MSMC”.
532
Supreme Court Reports
Clause 5(D) of the NIT. Further, Clause 8.1 provided that if the bidder 
did not submit the desired documents as per NIT at the time of 
submission of the bid, he shall not be allowed to submit documents 
subsequently and its bid is liable to be rejected on account of 
incomplete documents. Clause 8.1 of the NIT unequivocally states 
that –
“Instructions regarding shortfall documents:-
(i) The bidders not submitting all the desired documents 
as per NIT/Tender Document at the time of submitting 
bids, shall not be allowed to submit documents 
subsequently and their bids shall be rejected on 
account of incomplete documents. Thus, no “shortfall 
window” for submission of shortfall documents shall 
be created by MPPGCL in the e-tender.
(ii) Accordingly, Clause No. 1.15 (VII) “Verification of 
credentials/PQR” of the Standard Bid Document (SBD) 
so far as it relates to “Shortfall of document” window shall 
not be applicable. 
(iii) Any condition elsewhere mentioned in the 
NIT/Tender Document for submission of Shortfall 
Document shall not be applicable. 
(iv) However, techno-commercial clarifications (if required) 
shall be obtained through e-mail/physical form from the 
bidders” 
(emphasis supplied)
The said clause is further fortified by circular no. F-3/25/2015/13/109 
issued by the Government of Madhya Pradesh on 29.11.2023. 
9	
Circular dated 29.11.2023: “It has come to the notice of the department that bidders are being allowed 
to participate in the bid process with incomplete documents. Bidders are allowed to submit the balance 
documents in due course of time and meanwhile some of the bidders back out of the bidding process, 
allowing a few number of bidders to participate in the bidding process and quote non-competitive rates 
which results in financial loss to the Power Companies. It has therefore been decided that bidders not 
submitting all the desired documents as per NIT/Tender document at the time of submitting bids, 
should not be allowed to submit documents subsequently and their bids should be rejected on 
account of incomplete documents. If required, even fresh bid can be called to get competitive rates.
As directed, it is request to please ensure the bidding process to make it more transparent and fair.” 
(emphasis supplied)
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
533
Maha Mineral Mining & Benefication Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Madhya Pradesh Power Generating Co. Ltd. & Anr.
7.	
Appellant was fully aware of the requirement to furnish the JV agreement 
to demonstrate its proportionate share in the consortium in order to rely 
on the past-experience of such previous consortium/JV. In fact after 
the closing date, by email dated 05.07.2024, the appellant purportedly 
submitted a JV agreement dated 06.09.2019, which however did not 
correspond to the JV agreement dated 02.12.2019 referred to in the 
certificate issued by the MSMC. Be that as it may, such subsequent 
submission of document was impermissible as per Clause 8.1 of the 
NIT read with circular dated 29.11.2023 and the technical bid was 
rightly rejected for submission of incomplete document.
8.	
During the pendency of the writ petition, 2nd respondent was declared 
as the successful bidder and was impleaded in the proceedings. 
During hearing, the JV agreement dated 02.12.2019 was placed 
on record. Written submissions were also submitted on behalf of 
the parties.
Findings of the High Court
9.	
By the impugned judgement and order, the High Court upheld the 
decision of the Committee holding as follows:-
“22. Due to non-filing of Joint Venture agreement by the 
Petitioner, the Impugned Order rejecting the bid of the 
petitioner has to be seen wherein at the outset it has 
been stated that your bid for the above tender has been 
rejected during Technical evaluation by the duly constituted 
committee for the reason Bidder is disqualified due to 
non submission of credentials as per Clause No. (5)D of 
the NIT.” It is evident that the Petitioner has not filed the 
Joint Venture agreement. The Petitioner is disqualified 
for the reason of non compliance with the requirements 
in terms of Clause (5)D. The reason is also assigned by 
the Respondent No.1 in their reply as to why the petitioner 
was disqualified. If the petitioner is relying on the Joint 
Venture Agreement dated 02.12.2019 then it was the duty of 
Petitioner to file the same while submitting the bid. The NIT 
condition no. (8)1(i) and (8)(1)(iii), specifically prohibit the 
submission of the document/shortfall document at a later 
stage. As per the NIT conditions, a bidder is supposed to 
upload all the requisite documents at the time of submission 
534
Supreme Court Reports
of the bid. It is evident that the earlier practice of allowing 
bidders to fulfil the shortfall in documents left a scope for 
unfair practices in the bidding process and therefore, the 
said practice of allowing documents at a later stage has 
been discontinued in view of the past experience, as is 
evident from the letter 29.11.2023 of the GoMP, Energy 
Department. The Petitioner in the present case relied on 
the experience certificate issued by the Maharashtra 
State Mining Corporation dated 14.06.2024 wherein 
date of the Joint Venture agreement is mentioned as 
02.12.2019. However, surprisingly the Petitioner neither 
filed the said document of JV on record at the time 
of submission of bid nor at the time of filing of the 
petition. Even the document of JV agreement, which 
the Petitioner has filed along with the Email sent to 
Respondent No.1, is dated September, 2019 and not 
02.12.2019. The Petitioner has not filed the said JV 
Agreement from its own. It is apparent that there is a 
suppression of the JV Agreement dated 02.12.2019 by 
the Petitioner and hence, on this count of concealment 
of JV agreement dated 02.12.2019 the instant petition 
fails. The Petitioner has not given any satisfactory response 
in the petition or even otherwise for not submitting the 
document in alternate. Thus, the Petitioner cannot put 
forward its claim before demonstrating its bonafides 
that could have been done by duly submitting all the 
documents and by not engaging in active suppression 
and concealment…….” 
(emphasis supplied)
10.	 Thereafter, referring to the written submissions made by the 2nd 
respondent in light of Clauses 3.12, 3.13 and 8.5 of the JV agreement, 
the Bench further held:- 
“24. The additional submissions of the Respondent No.2 
have force and it is evident that in any case, even if 
the above-mentioned documents were provided by 
the Petitioner would have been disqualified as its 
washeries had been committed to Maharashtra State 
Mining Corporation Ltd. alone in terms with the 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
535
Maha Mineral Mining & Benefication Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Madhya Pradesh Power Generating Co. Ltd. & Anr.
Joint Venture Agreement dated 02.12.2019. Even the 
experience Certificate issued by Maharashtra State Mining 
Corporation Ltd. to the Petitioner categorically mentions 
the Joint Venture Agreement dated 02.12.2019.” 
(emphasis supplied)
11.	 In view of the aforesaid findings, the Division Bench dismissed the 
writ petition, giving rise to the present appeal.
12.	 Heard Mr. Narender Hooda, learned senior counsel for the appellant, 
Mr. Bijender Chahar, learned senior counsel for 1st respondent, and 
Mr. Shyam Divan and Mr. Balbir Singh, learned senior counsel for 
2nd respondent.
Analysis
13.	 It appears the High Court had not only upheld the disqualification of 
the appellant by the Tender Evaluation Committee for non-compliance 
of Clause 5(D) of the NIT but also went a step further and held, 
even if the JV agreement had been submitted, the appellant would 
have stood disqualified since its washeries had been exclusively 
committed to MSMC.
(I) Appellant’s disqualification under Clause 5(D) of the NIT
14.	 First, let us consider whether the decision of the High Court to uphold 
the appellant’s disqualification under Clause 5(D) for not furnishing 
JV agreement is justified or not?
15.	 Clause 5(D) of the NIT required the bidders to furnish documents 
relating to past-experience in similar work. The clause further provided 
that “bidder is allowed to use past experience of their previous 
Consortium or JV (proportionate to its share in that consortium if 
defined in the Consortium Agreement, otherwise, lead partner if not 
defined in the Consortium) to meet out the past experience criteria 
of the tender.” Sub-clause 1 and 2 of the said clause stated the 
following documents are to be submitted:-
“1. The work execution certificate by the customers 
along-with self-attested un-priced copies of aforesaid work 
order(s) should be submitted. 
2. For Past performance certificates - If worked with 
MPEB/ MPSEB/ MPPGCL in past for similar work, then 
536
Supreme Court Reports
it is mandatory to provide Satisfactory Performance 
Certificate for the same. Failing this, the offer shall not 
be considered.” 
(emphasis supplied)
Appellants had submitted a work execution certificate from MSMC 
along with its bid to support its past-experience as a 45% proportionate 
member of a consortium/JV for similar work executed at WCL in the 
last five years. The relevant portion of the certificate reads as follows:-
“……this is to certify that as part of the aforementioned 
contract agreement, M/s Maha Mineral Mining & 
Beneficiation Private Limited being the 45% Joint 
Venture/Consortium Partner of M/s. Hind Maha Mineral 
LLP vide the JV agreement dated 02.12.2019 (submitted 
to this office by M/s Hind Maha Mineral LLP) has executed 
the said work in respect of WCL command for the period 
05.03.2021 to 05.03.2024. The details are as follows:
a.	
Quantity of RoM Coal Lifted: 1,41,55,130.40 MT
b.	
Quantity of RoM coal washed: 1,17,95,440.46 MT
c.	
Quantity of washed coal supplied to Mahagenco 
TPSs: 1,17,47,501.99 MT
d.	
Approximate value of the work executed: Rs. 465 
crores.” 
(emphasis supplied)
16.	 The aforesaid certificate clearly demonstrates that the appellant had 
45% share in a JV consortium namely M/s Hind Maha Mineral LLP 
and had successfully executed work of similar nature as required 
by Clause 5(D) of the NIT. 
17.	 The Committee refused to rely on such certificate holding as follows :-
“(v) As per tender condition no documents other than 
Consortium/JV Agreement can be permitted to meet out 
the above criteria as per the NIT. Thus, the certificate 
submitted by M/s Maha Mineral Mining and Benefication 
Private Limited cannot be considered as valid document 
for the same.” 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
537
Maha Mineral Mining & Benefication Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Madhya Pradesh Power Generating Co. Ltd. & Anr.
18.	 Though the submission of a JV agreement has not been expressly 
stated in the aforesaid clause, the respondents argue that the 
proportionate share of a bidder in a consortium/JV can only be 
established through production of the JV agreement itself and 
the words used in the contract/tender document must be read in 
a purposive manner so that no part of the document is rendered 
superfluous. Respondents further contend appellant had submitted its 
bid on the last day and it was open to the appellant during the previous 
calls to seek clarification whether submission of JV agreement was 
mandatory. Appellant did not do so and intentionally suppressed the JV 
agreement while submitting its bid to avoid disclosure of inconvenient 
clauses in the JV agreement. This is evident from the appellant’s 
conduct as it had after submission of bid, emailed a purported JV 
agreement dated 06.09.2019, whereas the JV agreement mentioned 
in the certificate was a different one. Be that as it may, the subsequent 
submission of a JV agreement could not have been considered in 
light of Clause 8.1 read with circular dated 29.11.2023. 
19.	 We are unable to accept such arguments for the following reasons:-
(i)	
Clause 5(D) merely states the appellant would be entitled to 
use the past-experience of a previous consortium/JV in the 
event its proportionate share is defined in the JV agreement 
failing which the past-experience shall be attributed to the lead 
partner. The clause does not mandate the submission of the 
JV agreement itself to satisfy such criteria. Appellant had relied 
on the work execution certificate issued by MSMC which in no 
uncertain terms states the appellant had 45% share in the JV 
consortium named M/s Hind Maha Mineral LLP and successfully 
executed similar work of a volume larger than required under 
the clause. The certificate also mentioned the JV agreement 
had been submitted and was in the custody of MSMC.
(ii)	
It is nobody’s case that the 1st respondent had doubted the 
authenticity of the certificate but had disqualified the appellant 
on the ground that Clause 5(D) mandated furnishing of the JV 
agreement alone and nothing else to prove proportionate share 
in a previous JV in order to use such experience.
(iii)	 Conditions in a NIT must be clear and unambiguous. In the 
event the tendering authority insisted on furnishing of the 
JV agreement alone and no other document as proof of the 
538
Supreme Court Reports
proportionate share of the bidder to avail previous JV experience 
as prior qualification, it should have been spelt out clearly in the 
NIT. Having not done so, the 1st respondent cannot thrust the 
responsibility on the appellant to seek clarification and submit 
such document. As Clause 5(D) does not require submission 
of JV agreement itself to establish proportionate share in the 
JV whose past-experience the bidder is seeking to use, non-
submission of such JV cannot be a ground to disqualify the 
bidder for submission of incomplete documents in terms of 
Clause 8.1 of NIT. Admittedly, the appellant had submitted the 
work execution certificate, as required under clause 5(D), which 
also unequivocally sets out its proportionate share in the JV 
agreement whose prior experience it had relied on.
(iv)	 Though it is argued Clause 8.1 as well as circular dated 
29.11.2023 put an embargo on 1st respondent to rely on 
documents furnished after submission of bid, nothing 
prevented 1st Respondent to seek clarification with regard to 
the proportionate share of the appellant in the previous JV as 
disclosed in the work execution certificate. It may be apposite 
to note Clause 8.810 of the NIT, couched in a non-obstante 
clause, reserved the right of the 1st respondent to seek additional 
information to satisfy itself with regard to the eligibility of any 
bidder. 1st respondent failed to exercise such discretion by 
fortifying itself through calling for the JV agreement, which, when 
placed before this Court, unequivocally endorsed the contents 
of the certificate submitted by the Appellant.
(v)	
The other argument advanced by the respondents is that the 
appellant had acted with mala fide intention by suppressing 
the JV agreement and subsequently furnishing different 
versions of the said agreement at various stages i.e., before 
the 1st Respondent, in the Special Leave Petition and finally, 
by way of additional documents respectively. This argument 
is unacceptable as neither Clause 5(D) required submission 
of JV agreement to prove proportionate share nor was the 
10	
Clause 8.8: “Notwithstanding anything stated above, MPPGCL reserves the right to assess the 
creditability, capability and capacity to perform the contract. Should the circumstances warrant such 
an assessment in its overall interest, bidder shall furnish additional documents to substantiate its claim. 
MPPGCL also reserves the right to seek such additional information as it may deem fit to satisfy 
itself of the eligibility of the bidder.” (emphasis supplied)
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
539
Maha Mineral Mining & Benefication Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Madhya Pradesh Power Generating Co. Ltd. & Anr.
appellant called upon to submit such document. Moreover, 
the proportionate share of the appellant in the consortium 
as reflected in all the documents, i.e., the JV agreement 
submitted before the 1st Respondent, annexed to the SLP 
and the agreement with additional documents, is the same 
and consistent with the work execution certificate submitted 
in the bid. For these reasons, we are not in agreement with 
the argument that the appellant had intentionally suppressed 
the JV agreement or had approached the Court with unclean 
hands.
(vi)	 Finally, submission of the 2nd Respondent regarding a pending 
civil dispute between the consortium partners of M/s Hind 
Maha Mineral LLP is also of little consequence. Such dispute 
has no impact on the proportionate share of the appellant in 
the JV agreement and the work executed by the appellant as 
a part of the consortium for MSMC as disclosed in the work 
execution certificate.
20.	 In these circumstances, we are inclined to hold the 1st respondent 
acted contrary to the terms of the NIT and unfairly rejected the 
appellant’s bid for non-production of JV agreement although Clause 
5(D) did not prescribe production of such agreement as mandatory 
to rely on past-experience of such consortium in which the bidder 
had a defined proportionate share.
21.	 Accordingly, decision of the Committee, upheld by the High Court 
as per Clause 5(D) is liable to be set aside.
(II) Appellant’s disqualification under Clause 5(B) of the NIT
22.	 However, the High Court went a step further, traversing beyond 
the reasons given by the Committee and held the Appellant would 
otherwise be disqualified under Clause 5(B) of the NIT. Clause 5(B) 
reads as follows – 
“Details of Washery: 
Bidder should have its own Washery with wet beneficiation 
technology either of Heavy Media Cyclone or Heavy Media 
Bath or Wet Jig. The Bidder should have a minimum 
spare washing capacity using wet technology of 50% 
of annual tendered quantity, i.e., 5 Lakh Metric Tonnes 
540
Supreme Court Reports
(LMT), in area nearby to mines of WCL configured in 
the tender. Total distance from mine(s) to offered washery 
(ies) and offered washery (ies) to Railway siding shall not 
be more than 100 KM.” 
(emphasis supplied)
23.	 To arrive at such a finding the High Court relied on written arguments 
submitted by the 2nd respondent and held as per Clauses 3.12, 3.13 
and 8.5 of the JV agreement the appellant’s washeries were committed 
to MSMC and could not have been used for the present tender. 
Mr. Hooda rightly contends the issue was raised for the first time 
in the written submissions and his client did not get the opportunity 
to controvert the same. Referring to a chart placed before us,11 he 
vehemently argues the appellant’s Gondegaon washery had a spare 
capacity of 1.5 MMTPA12 which was much higher than the required 
spare capacity under Clause 5(B) of the NIT. He further contends a 
request13 had been made to MSMC to shift their operation to other 
washeries in terms of Clause 614 of the contract agreement executed 
between MSMC and the consortium, and the Gondegaon Washery 
was available for execution of the work under the present NIT. 
24.	 We are of the considered view the aforesaid issue is a contentious 
one and ought not to have been decided by the High Court without 
giving opportunity to the appellant to controvert the same. High 
Court also lost sight of the fact that the Committee had not adverted 
to this issue and it was impermissible for it to travel beyond the 
reasons given by the Committee and disqualify the appellant. It is 
also relevant to note that allotment of work order to 2nd respondent 
has been made subject to the outcome of this proceeding.
25.	 For these reasons, we remand the matter for a fresh consideration 
whether appellant had requisite spare washing capacity as per 
Clause 5(B) of the NIT and the validity of the work order in favour 
of the 2nd respondent in light of such decision. The High Court shall 
11	
Annexure P-34 in the Appellant’s Rejoinder to the Counter Affidavit filed by the 2nd Respondent.
12	
Million Metric Tonnes Per Annum.
13	
Letter dated 14.06.2024, annexed as P-36 in the Appellant’s Rejoinder to the Counter Affidavit filed by 
the 2nd Respondent.
14	
Clause 6: “ACCEPTED RATES:- Accepted Rates for beneficiation of raw coal as below (exclusive of 
GST). If any change in washery/railway siding is request by CONTRACTOR (LLP), then it should 
not put extra financial burden on MSMC” (emphasis supplied).
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
541
Maha Mineral Mining & Benefication Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Madhya Pradesh Power Generating Co. Ltd. & Anr.
decide the matter as expeditiously as possible preferably within two 
months from the date of communication of this order.
26.	 The impugned judgment and order of the High Court is set aside 
and the appeal is partly allowed. 
Result of the case: Appeal partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain