[2025] 3 S.C.R. 158 : 2025 INSC 221
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  
v. 
The State of Karnataka
(Criminal Appeal No. 593 of 2022)
11 February 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the correctness of the order passed by 
the High Court reversing the acquittal of the appellants-husband 
and mother-in-law of the deceased-wife and held them both guilty 
of offences under the Penal Code, 1860 and Dowry Prohibition 
Act, 1961 for causing the death of the deceased by setting her 
on fire.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.498A, 302 and 504 rw s.34 – Common 
intention – Individual liability – Appellants-husband and 
mother-in-law of the deceased-wife charged for causing 
her death by setting her on fire – Dying declaration made – 
Acquittal by the trial court of the offence punishable u/ss. 
498A, 302 and 504 rw s.34 and ss.3 and 4 of the 1961 Act – 
However, the High Court reversed the acquittal and held both 
of them guilty of the offences – Correctness: 
Held: Although s.34 deals with a criminal act which is joint and 
an intention which is common, it cannot be said that it completely 
ignores or eliminates the element of personal contribution of the 
individual offender in both these respects – Condition precedent 
of s.34 that the individual offender must have participated in the 
offence in both these respects – He must have done something, 
however slight, or conduct himself in some manner, however 
nebulous whether by doing an act or by omitting to do an act so 
as to indicate that he was a participant in the offence and a guilty 
associate in it – He must also be individually a party to an intention 
which he must share in common with others – He must be a sharer 
both in the ‘criminal act’ as well as in the ‘common intention’ which 
are the twin aspects of s.34 – No cogent and reliable evidence 
to hold the husband-appellant guilty of the alleged offence even 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
159
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
with the aid of s.34 – It is difficult for the accused to urge that 
owing to the mention of s.34, in the charge, he was misled or 
prejudiced in his defence by being persuaded to presume that 
all consideration of his individual liability was completely shut out 
as a result thereof – To implicate the husband also in the alleged 
crime, u/s.106 Evidence Act, the prosecution has to as a condition 
precedent lay the foundational facts prima facie indicating his 
involvement or participation in the alleged crime – His sudden 
disappearance after the incident not sufficient to infer common 
intention – Furthermore, it cannot be said that the deceased was 
not in a fit state of mind to give a dying declaration – Nothing 
to disbelieve the oral dying declaration made by the deceased 
before the doctor – Also pertinent to note that only the mother-
in-law, figures in the dying declaration as well as oral evidence 
of the doctor and the tehsildar – Thus, the High Court rightly held 
the mother-in-law-appellant no.2 guilty of the alleged crime but 
erred in holding the husband-appellant no.1 guilty of the offence 
of murder with the aid of s.34 – Conviction of appellant no.2 
affirmed – Appellant no.1 acquitted of all charges – Evidence Act, 
1872 – s.106 – Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 – ss.3, 4. [Paras 37, 
39, 41, 58, 63, 87-89, 91-93 ]
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.34 and 149 – Common intention  
vis-a-vis Common object – Difference between ss.34 and 
149 – Explained. [Paras 41-50 ]
Penal Code, 1860 – s.34 – Common intention – Criminal act – 
Meaning – Explained. [52-76]
Case Law Cited
Om Prakash v. State, 1956 CrLJ 452; Barendra Kumar Ghosh v. 
Emperor, AIR 1925 PC 1; Emperor v. Barendra Kumar Ghosh, 
AIR 1924 Cal 257 (FB); Shreekantiah Ramayya Munipalli v. State 
of Bombay (S) [1955] 1 SCR : 1177 AIR 1955 SC 287; Bashir v. 
State, AIR 1953 All 668; Faiyaz Khan v. Rex, AIR 1949 All 180; 
Aydrooss v. Emperor, AIR 1923 Mad 187; Abdul Kader v. Emperor, 
AIR 1946 Cal 452; Suresh Sakharam Nangare v. The State of 
Maharashtra [2012] 7 SCR 1186 : 2012 (9) Judgements Today 
116 – referred to. 
160
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961; Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973; Evidence Act 1872.
List of Keywords
Dowry; Setting wife on fire; Acquittal; Dying declaration; Common 
intention; Principal in the first degree; Principal in the second degree; 
Accessories at the fact; Accessories after the fact; Accessories 
before the fact; Presence on the scene; Common design; Pre-
concerted end; Successive acts; Simultaneous acts; Special 
knowledge; Intention of the individual offender; Mens rea; Common 
object of assembly as a whole; Abetment; Presence on the spot as 
spectator; Criminal Act; Fit state of mind to give dying declaration; 
Oral dying declaration; Oral evidence; Common intention of all; 
Individual offender; Unlawful assembly.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
593 of 2022
From the Judgment and Order dated 06.10.2020 of the High Court 
of Karnataka Circuit Bench at Dharwad in CRLA No. 100168 of 2016
Appearances for Parties
H. Chandra Sekhar, Adv. for the Appellants. 
Avishkar Singhvi, A.A.G., V. N. Raghupathy, Vivek Kumar Singh, 
Naved Ahmed, Ms. Sakshi Raman, Advs. for the Respondent. 
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High 
Court of Karnataka, Dharwad Bench in Criminal Appeal No. 100168 
of 2016 dated 6th October 2020 by which the High Court allowed the 
appeal filed by the State of Karnataka and thereby quashed and set 
aside the judgment and order passed by the VIth Additional District 
& Sessions Judge, Belagavi in S.C. No. 151 of 2013 acquitting the 
appellants herein of the offence punishable under Sections 498A, 
302 and 504 read with Section 34 respectively of the Indian Penal 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
161
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
Code, 1860 (for short “the IPC”) and Sections 3 and 4 respectively 
of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.
2.	
It is the case of the prosecution that the deceased named Geetha was 
married to the appellant no.1 herein viz. Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab 
Sanavale past 8 years from the date of the incident. In the wedlock 
three children were born. It is alleged that after a period of one year 
from the date of marriage the husband and his family members 
started harassing the deceased. The deceased was being harassed 
for dowry and in connection with the domestic house hold work.
3.	
On the date of the incident at around 8.00 p.m. while the deceased 
was at her matrimonial home, her mother-in-law i.e. the appellant 
no.2 herein is alleged to have poured kerosene on her body and set 
her on fire. The deceased suffered extensive burn injuries.
4.	
The neighbours residing in the vicinity rushed to the place of the 
incident and immediately shifted her to the hospital. The deceased 
succumbed to the burn injuries after a period of one week. The cause 
of death as usual is septicemia.
5.	
The mother of the deceased Tippavva Chandru Patil, lodged an FIR 
dated 03-01-2013 which came to be registered as crime No. 2 of 
2013 in Mudalagi Police Station, Mudalagi Circle, District Belagavi, 
Karnataka. The first information report reads thus:-
“The accused persons mentioned herein are the husband, 
mother-in-law and father-in-law of Geetha, daughter of the 
complainant and the said accused persons looked after 
Geetha cordially for 1 year after marriage but then they have 
not only ill-treated her physically and mentally by insisting 
her to wake up early in the morning and do the household 
chores and to go to the house of others to work but also 
pressurized her to bring an amount of Rs.5,000/- from her 
maternal house and since she did not bring money from 
her maternal house, the accused person had the intention 
to kill her and poured kerosene on her and set fire and 
tried to kill her and thereby committed offence.”
6.	
On the FIR being registered the investigation started. The Tehsiladar 
of the area was requested to reach the hospital for the purpose of 
recording of the dying declaration of the deceased. The Tehsildar 
162
within four hours of the incident reached the hospital and recorded 
the dying declaration Exhibit-46.
7.	
The statements of various witnesses, more particularly, the neighbours 
who had brought the deceased to the hospital were recorded under 
Section 161 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973(for short “the 
Cr.P.C.”). After the deceased passed away her body was sent to post 
mortem examination. The other articles collected in the course of 
the investigation like clothes etc. were sent to the Forensic Science 
Laboratory for the purpose of chemical analysis.
8.	
At the end of the investigation, Police filed charge-sheet against the 
husband and mother-in-law respectively for the offence enumerated 
above. The case being exclusively triable by the Sessions Court 
came to be committed to the Court of Sessions Under Section 209 
of the Cr.P.C.
9.	
The trial court proceeded to frame the charge against the accused 
persons under Sections 498-A, 302, 114, 323 and 504 r/w Sec.34 
of IPC respectively and Sections 3 and 4 respectively of Dowry 
Prohibition Act to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
10.	 The prosecution examined the following witnesses in support of its 
case:-
“PW1 Anand Shankar Sanawale
PW2 Laxman Ramappa Sanawale.
PW3 Sushila Dilip Sanawale.
PW4 Shabbir Samsher Sanawale.
PW5 Latha Shashikant Sanawale.
PW6 Julekha Gulabsab Sanawale.
PW7 Smt. Yallawwa Ramu Karale.
PW8 Krishna Mukappa Shivalli.
PW9 Malik Chandru Patil.
PW10 Prakash Shankar Sanawale.
PW11 Smt. Tippavva Chandru Patil.
PW12 Hanumanth Bhima Nayak.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
163
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
PW13 Dastagir Abdulsab Inamdar.
PW14 Dr. Adam Allasab Nadaf.
PW15 Dr.Gopal Ramu Wagamude.
PW16 Shivanand Basavanthappa Dhulai.
PW17 Suresh Shankar Murgod.
PW18 Maruti Yallappa Padadalli.
PW19 Anil Balappa Padedar.
PW20 Lakkappa Durgappa Taddi.
PW21 Oudram Hammabba Beary
PW22 Sureshbabu Rudrappa Bandiwaddar.
PW23 Sharanappa.M.Olekar.
PW24 Mrthunjay Irayya Mathapati.
PW25 Dr.N.Sujatha Nanjegouda”
11.	 The prosecution also led the following pieces of documentary 
evidence:-
“(i) Ex.P.8 Mahazar of place of occurrence 
(ii)	
Ex.P.27 Post Mortem Report
(iii) Ex.P.30 Opinion of the Doctor before recording the Dying 
Declaration (PW15)
(iv)	 Ex.P.30 Opinion of the Doctor before recording the Dying 
Declaration (PW25)
(v) Ex.P.46 Dying Declaration
(vi) Ex.P.54 FSL Report”
12.	 Upon closure of the recording of the evidence, the trial court recorded 
the further statement of both the accused persons under Section 
313 of the Cr.P.C. in which both the accused said that they were 
innocent and had been falsely implicated. 
13.	 Upon appreciation of the oral as well as documentary evidence on 
record, the trial court recorded a finding that the prosecution had 
failed to establish its case beyond reasonable doubt and accordingly 
acquitted both the accused.
164
14.	 The State being dissatisfied with the judgement and order of acquittal 
passed by the trial court went in appeal before the High Court. The 
High Court reversed the finding of acquittal and held both the accused 
guilty of the alleged offence. The High Court ultimately sentenced 
them to life imprisonment with fine.
15.	 In such circumstances, referred to above, the appellants are here 
before this Court with the present appeal.
16.	 Mr Faeek-ul-Farooq, the learned counsel appearing for the appellants 
vehemently submitted that the High Court committed an egregious 
error in reversing a well-reasoned judgement of the acquittal. 
According to him, even if a different view is possible on the evidence 
on record, the High Court as an Appellate Court should be slow in 
reversing the acquittal unless the High Court comes to the conclusion 
that the findings recorded by the trial court are perverse or contrary 
to the evidence on record.
17.	 He would submit that the High Court committed a serious error in 
relying upon the dying declaration of the deceased recorded by the 
Tehsildar. According to him having regard to the medical evidence on 
record the dying declaration should be discarded as the deceased 
at the relevant point of time was not in a fit condition of mind to 
speak anything.
18.	 He submitted that so far as the appellant no.1 i.e. the husband is 
concerned, there is no case at all against him.
19.	 He would submit that the deceased neither in the oral dying declaration 
made before the Doctor nor in the dying declaration recorded by the 
Tehsildar has said anything against the husband. On the contrary, 
according to the learned counsel the deceased in the dying declaration 
before the Tehsildar has said that the husband poured water on her 
to extinguish the fire.
20.	 In such circumstances, referred to above, the learned counsel prayed 
that there being merit in his appeal the same may be allowed and 
the accused persons be acquitted.
21.	 On the other hand, Mr.Singhvi, the learned counsel appearing for the 
State submitted that no error not to speak of any error of law could 
be said to have been committed by the High Court in reversing the 
acquittal and holding the appellants herein guilty of the offence of 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
165
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
murder. He would submit that the only thing that weighed with the 
trial court in disbelieving the dying declaration is the fact that all other 
witnesses, more particularly, the neighbours had turned hostile and 
failed to support the case of the prosecution.
22.	 According to Mr. Singhvi, the oral dying declaration made by the 
deceased before PW-15 Dr.Gopal Ramu Wagamude and the dying 
declaration before the Tehsildar exhibit P-21 is sufficient enough to 
at least hold the appellant no.2 guilty of the alleged crime.
23.	 In the last Mr. Singhvi tried to develop an argument that although 
the husband may not be directly involved or in other words has not 
been directly implicated in the alleged crime still it is established that 
he was present in the house and it was expected of the husband 
to take all necessary precautions or steps to save his wife and the 
failure or omission on his part would indicate the common intention 
shared by him along with his mother. 
24.	 Mr. Singhvi also tried to invoke Section 106 of the Evidence Act 
arguing that something within the personal knowledge of the husband 
should have been disclosed by the husband in his further statement 
recorded under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. In the absence of any 
plausible explanation the High Court rightly held the husband also 
guilty with the aid of Section 34 of the IPC.
25.	 In such circumstances, referred to above, Mr. Singhvi prayed that 
there being no merit in this appeal, the same may be dismissed.
ANALYSIS:
26.	 Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and 
having gone through the materials on record, the only question that 
falls for our consideration is whether the High Court committed any 
error in passing the impugned judgement?
27.	 We first start with the dying declaration recorded by the Tehsildar.
28.	 The dying declaration exhibit-46 recorded by the Tehsildar reads thus:-
“Question No.1: Are you conscious and in a sound state of mind?
Answer: Yes
Question No.2: Are. you in a state to speak?
Answer: Yes
166
Question No.3: Where are you now?
Answer: General Hospital, Gokak.
Question No.4: When and who brought you here and by what 
means?
Answer: The people belonging to my lane brought me here 
yesterday in ambulance at about 8~30 p.m.
Question No.5: Who attacked you? 
Answer: My mother-in-law poured kerosene on me and my 
mother-in-law Jaitunabi lit matchstick and threw on me and 
set fire.
Question No.6: Give their name and address?
Answer: Jaitunabi Sanavale
Question No. 7: How do you identify her?
Answer: I identify her.
Question No.8: How did you sustain injury?
Answer: I have sustained injuries by fire.
Question No.9: What are the weapons used and describe the 
shapes?
Answer: Kerosene and matchstick.
Question No.10: In which place you are attacked?
Answer: In the house situated in Mudalagi.
Question No.11: Can you identify wounds on your body?
Answer: Yes.
Question No.12: How and in what manner you have sustained 
injuries?
Answer: Burnt by pouring kerosene.
Question No.13: What was the intention behind the attack?
Answer: I was in house and in the evening there was quarrel 
due to my children and at that time my mother-in-law Jaitunabi 
Sanavale got enraged due to quarrel and poured kerosene 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
167
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
on me and when I was going to bathroom, my mother-in-law 
Jaitunabi lit matchstick and threw it on me. My husband Vasant 
splashed water on me but the fire did not extinguish and at 
that time the residents of the lane gathered and took me in 
ambulance to General Hospital at about 8.30 p.m.”
29.	 In the aforesaid context we shall now look into the oral evidence of 
the Tehsildar. The Tehsildar PW-21 namely Oudram in his examination 
in chief has deposed thus:-
“On 3-1-2013 when I was discharging my duty as Tahsildar 
Gokak. I, received requisition from Mudalagi police station as 
per Ex.P.42 which was received in my said office. 
On the same day I went to Govt. hospital Gokak and wrote a 
letter to Medical Officer, Govt hospital Gokak as per Ex.P.32 
seeking his opinion whether Geeta was able to give any 
statement, which bears my signature Ex.P. 32 (b). The said 
Medical Officer in Ex.P.32 has endorsed that patient was able 
to give oral statement. 
Accordingly, I have recorded dying declaration of the said Geeta. 
She for questioning who, when and how she was brought to 
hospital, she answered that the residents of her lane brought 
her on previous night at 8.30 pm by ambulance.
For questing who assaulted her, she replied her mother-in-law 
had poured kerosene and aunt, namely- Jaitunabi, set her fire 
my matchstick. 
For questioning whether she could identify her, she replied 
that she could. For questioning how she sustained injuries, 
she replied she sustained burn injuries. For questioning where 
crime was committed, she replied that at home at Mudalagi. 
For questioning the intention of the crime she replied when she 
was there in house in the evening, there was quarrel because 
of her children. Her mother-in-law enraged by the said quarrel 
poured kerosene on her. When she was going to bathroom her 
mother-in-law Jaitunabi, lighted match stick and threw on her. 
Her husband, Vasant, splashed water on her. The fire did not 
extinguish. At that time the people from her lane gathered and 
took her to hospital at 8.30 pm by an ambulance.
168
Since her palms were burned I took finger impression of her 
left toe on the said dying declaration.
Afterwards I have signed said dying declaration and the Medical 
Officer has also signed the same. On 4-2-2013 I received 
requisition, marked Ex.P. 44, seeking to issue true copy of 
dying declaration of deceased Geeta. On 4-2-2013 I sent a 
letter, with one true copy of dying declaration and one sealed 
envelope containing original dying declaration to CPI, marked, 
Ex.P.45, which bears my signature Ex.P.45(a)
(In the open court a sealed cover received from Addl. JMFC, 
Gokak is opened.) 
The dying declaration of Geeta is Ex.P.46;my signature is Ex 
P.46(a)(b);The left toe impression of Geeta there-in is Ex.P.46(c); 
The signature of medical officer there-in is Ex.P.46(d). I have 
recorded the dying declaration of Geeta on 3-1-2013 from 12.15 
p.m. to 12.25 p.m.”
30.	 Unfortunately, there is no cross examination worth the name of the 
Tehsildar. Nothing substantial could be elicited through the cross 
examination thereby to disbelieve that the deceased was not in a 
fit state of mind to give a dying declaration
31.	 We now proceed to look into the evidence of Dr. Gopal Ramu 
Wagamude Exhibit 17 (PW-15). Dr. Gopal Waghmude in his 
examination-in-chief as deposed as under:-
“I have been serving as Senior Specialist in General 
Hospital, Gokak, since 2011. On 02.01.2013 at about 
9.30 p.m., Anand S. Sanavale had brought Geetha 
Vasant Sanavale, aged about 28 years; R/o Mudalagi, 
to our Hospital requiring treatment for burn injuries. As 
per the information given by Geetha; her mother-in-law 
poured kerosene on her and set her ablaze. She also 
informed that this incident occurred on the same day at 
about 8.00 p.m. On examining her, she was in conscious 
state. She was telling that she was feeling thirsty. When 
she was examined, her B.P was 90/70 and her pulse 
was palpitating and kerosene smell was coming out of 
her body. On examining her, normal burn injuries were 
found on her face and neck, Deep burn injuries were 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
169
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
found on her right hand, left hand, right leg and left leg. 
Deep burn injuries were found on abdomen and back 
and all these injuries appeared reddish in colour. All 
these injuries were grievous in nature and also fresh in 
nature. Nearly 90% of burn injuries were found. I have 
given treatment to the said as in-patient. I have also given 
treatment to her on 03.01.2013. Except me, General 
Surgeon has also provided treatment to this patient. 
On 03.01.2013, A.S.I of Mudalagi Police station gave a 
requisition requesting to know whether the patient is in the 
condition to give statement or not. The document which 
is shown to me now is the office copy of the requisition 
which was given to me on that day. It has been marked 
as Ex.P.30. Ex.P.30 bears my signature about receiving 
it. In Ex.P.30, I have written my opinion that the patient 
is in the condition to give statement. It has been marked 
as Ex.P.30 (a). I have furnished wound certificate about 
the injuries. The document which is shown to me now is 
the wound certificate that I have furnished. It has been 
marked as Ex.P.31. The signature of witness has been 
marked as Ex.P.31 (a). The document which is shown to 
me now is the office copy of the requisition given by the 
Tahsildar to N. Sujatha, Junior Specialist of our Hospital. 
The said requisition bears signature of N. Sujatha. The 
said document has been marked as Ex.P.32. In Ex.P.32, 
Junior Specialist Sujatha has given opinion and affixed 
signature by stating that the patient is in the condition 
to give statement. It has been marked as Ex.P.32 (a). 
When a person pours kerosene on another person, there 
are chances of sustaining injuries found in Ex.P.31. The 
above-mentioned patient was referred to KIMS Hospital, 
Hubballi from our hospital for further treatment.”
32.	 Again, there is no cross examination of Dr. Wagamude.	N o t h i n g 
substantial could be elicited through the cross examination of the Dr. 
so as to disbelieve the oral dying declaration made by the deceased 
before him. 
33.	 However, what is pertinent for us to note is that nowhere the husband 
figures. It is only the mother-in-law, who figures in the dying declaration 
as well as oral evidence of the Doctor and the Tehsildar.
170
34.	 We also looked into the evidence, so as to ascertain whether the 
deceased was in a fit condition to make the dying declaration or not. 
There is nothing on record to indicate that she was unable to talk 
or was not conscious.
35.	 To a very pertinent question put by us to Mr. Singhvi as to what 
weighed with the High Court in holding the husband guilty of the 
alleged offence, he invited the attention of this Court to para 30 of the 
impugned judgement. In para 30, the High Court has observed thus:-
30. From the very statement of Geetha, cruelty to her in 
the hands of the accused persons is established invariably 
and without iota of doubt. The cause of death is burn 
injuries and the burn injuries are established to have been 
inflicted by accused Nos.1 and 2, they are charged with 
common intention. If the accused No.1 was really about 
to save his wife, he could have done it when she was in 
murderous condition by sustaining injuries to the extent 
of 90-95% inflicted in his person in his presence and in 
the presence of hostility of himself and his wife, he never 
bothered even to take her to treatment. He wanted to 
ensure that she dies. In this connection, the offence may 
be with respect of commission or omission.”
36.	 The plain reading of para 30 referred to above would indicate that what 
weighed with the High Court in holding the husband-appellant guilty 
is the fact that he never bothered to take his wife to the hospital as 
he wanted to ensure that she does not survive. Therefore, according 
to the High Court, the husband could be said to be guilty having 
shared common intention with his mother. We have not been able 
to understand exactly what the High Court wants to convey.
37.	 Be that as it may, we have reached the conclusion that there is no 
cogent and reliable evidence to hold the husband-appellant guilty 
of the alleged offence even with the aid of Section 34 of the IPC. 
Section 34 of the IPC reads thus:-
“34. Acts done by several persons in furtherance of 
common intention.—When a criminal act is done by several 
persons, in furtherance of the common intention of all, each 
of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner 
as if it were done by him alone.”
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
171
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
38.	 If there is one decision explaining Section 34 IPC which could be 
termed as locus classicus then the same is the Allahabad High Court 
decision in the case of Om Prakash v. State reported in 1956 CrLJ 
452. Justice M.H. Beg (as His Lordship then was) has beautifully 
explained the provision and its applicability.
39.	 In order that an intention should be common, it should be attributable 
to every member of the group. This is also clarified by the fact that 
the section itself characterises the common intention to be the 
‘common, intention of all’. Section 34, IPC, therefore, does not ignore 
the intention of the individual offender.
40.	 It only adds some more persons in the commission of the offence 
and postulates that the same intention was jointly existing in the 
mind of every individual member of the group as well. It may be 
that the intention was alleged to be common, but that only means 
that every member shared it along with others and not the some 
members shared it and others did not.
41.	 The common intention required under Section 34 Penal Code need 
not, however, be identical with the guilty intention or ‘mens rea’ which 
is the ingredient of the offence and is to be distinguished from it. The 
latter might be coincident with or collateral to the former.
42.	 On the other hand, the position under Section 149, IPC, is very 
different. The charge framed under Section 149, IPC, disregards 
the intention of the individual members of the assembly altogether, 
and concentrates merely on the common object of the assembly 
as a whole. The result of this position is that there may be cases 
in which a person might be guilty of an offence under Section 149, 
IPC though he himself had no intention to commit it or was even 
unaware of its commission.
43.	 There may even be cases where a person might be found guilty of 
an offence under Section 149 though it was committed quite contrary 
to his own intention. Supposing for instance, an unlawful assembly 
is formed with the object of wiping out all members of a particular 
community residing in a mohalla. While this assembly is busy in 
its unlawful activities, some of its members might come across a 
member of the other community and might in prosecution of the 
common object proceed to murder him.
172
44.	 But a particular individual, say X, who is a member of this very 
unlawful assembly might discover that Y was his old friend. X might 
not want that this old friend of his should be killed, and in spite of 
his wishes, and contrary to his intention, Y might be murdered.
45.	 If it so happens, then X who was a member of the unlawful assembly, 
might be held to be guilty of an offence committed by another 
member of the said assembly, even though the offence itself was 
committed quite contrary to his desires and even in opposition to 
his own intention provided it is shown that X continued to remain a 
member of the assembly at the time of the offence and the offence 
itself was directly or indirectly within the purview of the common 
object of the assembly.
46.	 The reason is that the criminal liability under Section 149, IPC is 
determined not by the intention of the various individual members 
constituting it but by the common object of the assembly as a whole. 
The result is that when a charge against a person is framed for an 
offence under Section 149, IPC, read with a relative section, and the 
person is convicted of the offence under the relative section alone, 
he might legitimately complain that his own mental state having 
never been put into issue under the charge at all, he was taken by 
surprise in the matter and thereby misled and prejudiced.
47.	 For the purpose of the above discussion I am presuming that a charge 
framed under Section 149, IPC is the usual charge under which the 
individual authorship of the offence is not defined or specified, and 
the offence is alleged in the charge to be the act of an undefined 
member of the assembly. The position under Section 34 is different. 
The connection here between the offender and the offence is far 
closer and deeper.
48.	 Under Section 34 every individual offender is associated with the 
criminal act which constitutes the offence both physically as well as 
mentally. That is, he is a sharer not only in what has been described 
as a common act but also in what is termed as the common intention, 
and, therefore, in both these respects his individual role is put into 
serious jeopardy although this individual role might be a part of a 
common scheme in which others have also joined him and played 
a role that is similar or different. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
173
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
49.	 To put it in other words, whereas under Section 149, IPC the entire 
emphasis both in respect of the physical act as well as in respect of 
the mental state is placed on the assembly as a whole, under Section 
34, IPC, the weight in respect of both is divided and is placed both 
on the individual member as well as on the entire group. 
50.	 Section 34, IPC, as contrasted with Section 149, IPC, therefore, 
balances the individual and the general aspect, although while 
taking into account the individual aspect it conceives it as part and 
parcel of the general aspect. In this sense, Section 34, IPC, is far 
more restricted than Section 149, IPC. If, therefore, a person is 
charged with an offence with the application of Section 34, IPC, 
and convicted for the substantive offence only, it is not so easy for 
him to advance the plea that he was not aware that the matter had 
any individual aspect.
51.	 Participation of the individual offender in the criminal act in some 
form or the other which is the leading feature of Section 34, IPC 
differentiates it not only from Section 149, IPC, but also from other 
affiliated offences like criminal conspiracy and abetment. A bare 
agreement between two or more persons to do or cause to be done 
an illegal act might make a person liable for the offence of criminal 
conspiracy as defined in Section 120, IPC. If the said agreement 
is to commit offence, then such an agreement is by itself enough 
to make a man guilty and no overt act apart from the agreement 
would be necessary. 
52.	 If, however, the agreement is to commit an act which is not 
tantamount to an offence, then some overt act in pursuance thereof 
is necessary. Such overt act may, however, be performed by any 
person who is a party to the agreement and not necessarily by the 
particular accused who might be guilty of the offence without having 
participated in the act. 
53.	 On the other hand, under Section 34, IPC, a mere agreement, 
although it might be a sufficient proof of the common intention, would 
be wholly insufficient to sustain a conviction with the application of 
Section 34, IPC, unless some criminal act is done in furtherance of 
the said common intention and the accused himself has in some way 
or the other participated in the commission of the said act.
174
54.	 The offence itself would be complete even though the act abetted is 
not committed; or, even if the act is committed, the abettor himself 
has not participated in it. Thus, actual participation in the commission 
of the offence, which is a condition precedent of Section 34 and is 
its main feature, again distinguishes it from the offence of abetment. 
55.	 Section 34, IPC, compendiously summarises the liability imposed 
under English Law on what are therein called as principal in the 
first degree and principal in the second degree and assimilates the 
principles underlying both by compressing them in one section and 
treating them as what have been called accessories at the fact as 
opposed to what are termed as accessories before the fact and 
accessories after the fact. 
56.	 In this connection, Mr. Singhvi the learned counsel for the State 
argued that a person who is present on the spot at the time of the 
commission of the offence would be guilty by the application of 
Section 34, IPC. although such a person did not do anything.
57.	 A person present on the scene might or might not be guilty by the 
application of Section 34, IPC. If he is present on the scene for the 
purpose of participating in the offence, he would certainly be guilty 
as a participator in the offence. On the other hand, if he is present 
there merely as a spectator, he would not be guilty. 
58.	 Thus, for example a person who is an eyewitness of the incident is 
present at the spot as well as a person who is a confederate of the 
assailant. The former is not guilty because he is present merely to 
see the commission of the crime. On the other hand, the latter is 
guilty because he is present for the purpose of seeing that the crime 
is committed. In other words, presence on the spot for the purpose 
of facilitating or promoting the offence is itself tantamount to actual 
participation in the criminal act. 
59.	 As observed by the Privy Council in the case of Barendra Kumar 
Ghosh v. Emperor, AIR 1925 PC 1 (C), “It is to be remembered that 
in crimes as in other things ‘they also serve who only stand and 
wait’”. The following observations of Mookerjee, J. in the case of 
Emperor v. Barendra Kumar Ghosh, AIR 1924 Cal 257 (FB) (D) are 
relevant in this connection:
 “It is the expectation of aid, in case it is necessary to the 
completion of the crime and the belief that his associate is 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
175
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
near and ready to render it which encourage and embolden 
the chief perpetrator, and incite him to accomplish the act. 
By the countenance and assistance which the accomplice 
thus renders, he participates in the commission of the 
offence. 
60.	 It is, therefore, sufficient to hold a party as principal, if it is made 
to appear that he acted with another in pursuance of a common 
design; that he operated at one and the same time for the fulfilment 
of the same pre-concerted end, and was so situated as to be able 
to furnish aid to his associates with a view to insure success in the 
accomplishment of the common enterprise”, (p. 280) 
61.	 In a similar strain are the following instructive observations in the 
judgment of Richardson, J., in the same case:
“Moreover, it is impossible to say what might have 
happened, if one man alone had set out to accomplish 
the murder. Without the support moral and physical, of a 
comrade, his resolution might have failed him and his pistol 
remained in his pocket or diminution of confidence might 
have interfered with his aim; or again, he might have been 
successfully resisted and put to flight”, (p. 296).
62.	 At p. 308 col. (1) of the same case Ghose J. has quoted the following 
illuminating passage from Poster’s Criminal Law: 
“Several persons set out together, or in small parties, 
upon one common design, be it murder or other felony, or 
for any other purpose unlawful in itself, and each taketh 
the part assigned to him; some to commit the act, others 
to watch at proper distances and stations to prevent a 
surprise, or to favour, if need be, the escape of those who 
are more immediately engaged. They are all, provided 
the act be committed, in the eye of the law present at 
it; for it was made a common cause with them, each 
man operated in his station at one and the same instant 
towards the same common end, and the part each man 
took tended to give countenance, encouragement and 
protection to the whole gang, and to ensure the success 
of their common enterprise. To sum up persons executing 
parts of a crime separately in furtherance of a common 
intention are equally guilty”.
176
63.	 It is, therefore, not correct for the appellant’s learned counsel to say 
that a person present on the spot does nothing. He plays a very 
important part in the scheme of the commission of the offence. The 
potential utility of a person who is present as a guilty confederate 
on the scene of offence cannot be overestimated.
64.	 The word ‘criminal act’ is used in Section 34, IPC in the broadest 
possible sense. It would cover any word, gesture, deed or conduct 
of any kind on the part of a person whether active or passive, which 
tends to support the common design. 
65.	 A ‘criminal act’ in Section 34, IPC consists of the entire bundle of 
acts or omissions tied together with the chain of common intention 
that have combined to constitute the offence. The acts that it might 
comprise within itself may be similar or diverse. 
66.	 Such acts may be performed simultaneously, successively or at 
intervals. Instances to illustrate such acts are of a multifarious type. 
For example, two persons may beat a man at the same time, and 
if their acts are in furtherance of a common end, Section 34 IPC, 
would be attracted. The acts here are simultaneous. 
67.	 Again, for example, two jailors whose duty it is to attend alternately 
on a prisoner may conspire to starve him to death. In pursuance of 
this conspiracy, they may omit to supply food to him. In this case 
the conduct consists of omissions and the acts of the accused are 
successive and not simultaneous. Or, for example, two persons may 
conspire to forge a document. 
68.	 One may forge a part of it on one day and the other may forge the 
remaining part of it after a gap of a month. In this instance the acts 
of both the persons would attract Section 34, IPC even though there 
is an interval between acts performed by each of the two persons 
separately. 
69.	 Such act may consist of a mere gesture or expression or conduct that 
may provide a signal for offence or help the confederate in identifying 
the victim. Thus, for example two persons may conspire to kill a third 
man. One may know him and the other may not know him.
70.	 It may be agreed between the two that the person who knows him will 
stand near the man who would be the victim and thereby enable the 
person to whom the part of killing is assigned to identify the victim. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
177
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
If the scheme is carried out, both would be guilty under Section 34, 
IPC, even though the man who stood near the victim was merely 
present on the spot and apparently did nothing. If, however, the 
scheme is analysed, it would appear that by his presence near the 
victim he played a very important part. 
71.	 In fact, it was his presence near the victim that really contributed to 
the successful commission of the crime. The part may consist of a 
mere omission. Thus, for example, a person who is employed as 
a sentinel to guard the room of the deceased might agree with the 
murderer to allow him entry into the room with a view to enable him 
to accomplish the murderous deed. 
72.	 If the murderer turns up according to the pre-arranged plan and the 
sentinel deliberately omits to prevent his entry into the room, he has 
done an act which has contributed as effectively to the perpetration 
of the murder as the actual act of killing itself. 
73.	 In fact, the murder might not have been possible without the omission 
on his part. The various acts may be quite diverse in nature. Thus, if 
two persons conspire to commit theft and devise a plan according to 
which one of them would lure the shopkeeper away to an adjoining 
room on the pretext of having conversation with him thereby leaving 
the shop unprotected in order to enable the other persons to commit 
theft and the scheme is executed according to the plan, both of them 
would be equally guilty of theft by the application of the provisions of 
Section 34, IPC although their respective acts are of a very different 
type. 
74.	 In such a case, although only one man has committed the actual 
theft and the other has done nothing except entering into a friendly 
chat with the shopkeeper with a view to secure his removal from 
the scene, yet the part played by the latter is no less important than 
that of the former. 
75.	 It is, therefore, evident that every person charged with the aid of 
Section 34, must in some form or the other participate in the offence 
in order to make him liable thereunder. For the above reason, I find 
myself unable to endorse the argument of the appellants’ learned 
counsel that a guilty associate merely present on the spot cannot 
be said to participate in the commission of the offence. 
178
76.	 The element of participation in the commission of the offence is the 
chief feature that distinguishes Section 34, IPC from Section 149, 
IPC and other kindred sections. This has been emphasised in a 
large number of decided cases. 
77.	 In Shreekantiah Ramayya Munipalli v. State of Bombay, (S) AIR 
1955 SC 287 (E) while expounding the meaning of Section 34, IPC 
Bose, J. observed as follows:—
“It is the essence of the section that the person must be 
physically present at the actual commission of the crime. 
He need not be present in the actual room; he can, for 
instance, stand guard by a gate outside ready to warn his 
companions about any approach of danger or wait in a car 
on a nearby road ready to facilitate their escape, but he 
must be physically present at the scene of the occurrence 
and must actually participate in the commission of the 
offence in some way or other at the time the crime is 
actually being committed. The antithesis is between the 
preliminary stages, the agreement, the preparation, the 
planning, which is covered by S. 109, and the stage of 
commission when the plans are put into effect and carried 
out. Section 34 is concerned with the latter”, (p. 293). 
78.	 At page 294, col. (1) of the same judgment it is observed that:— 
“The emphasis in S. 34 is on the word ‘done’. When a 
criminal act is ‘done’ by several persons, it is essential that 
they join in the actual ‘doing’ of the act and not merely in 
planning its perpetration”.
79.	 In the same case, the following observations of their Lordships of 
the Privy Council in the case in AIR 1925 PC 1 (C) on this point 
were cited with approval:
“Participation and joint action’ in the actual commission of 
crime’ are, in substance, matters which stand in antithesis 
to abetments or attempts”. 
80.	 The distinction between Section 34, IPC, and Section 149, IPC in 
this regard has been brought out by Lord Sumner in the well-known 
case in AIR 1925 PC 1 (C) thus:
“There is a difference between object and intention, for, 
though their object is common, the intentions of the several 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
179
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
members, may differ and indeed may be similar only in 
respect that they are all unlawful, while the element of 
participation in action which is the leading feature of S. 
34, is replaced in S. 149 by membership of the assembly 
at the time of the committing of the offence”. 
81.	 In Bashir v. State, AIR 1953 All 668 (F) which is a Bench decision 
of the Allahabad High Court, it was observed by Desai J. that:— 
“All the persons who are sought to be made liable by 
virtue of S. 34 must have done some act which is included 
in the ‘criminal act’. One who has not taken any part in 
doing the criminal act cannot be made liable under the 
section”, (p. 671 col 1). 
82.	 In Faiyaz Khan v. Rex, AIR 1949 All 180 (G) it was held that:— 
“Section 34 refers to cases in which several persons both 
intend to do and do an act. It does not refer to cases 
where several persons intend to do an act and some one 
or more of them do an entirely different act. In the latter 
class of cases S. 149 may be applicable, but S. 34 is 
not”, (p. 184 col. 1). 
83.	 In AIR 1924 Cal 257 (D) which is a Full Bench case of the Calcutta 
High Court, Cuming J. observed that:
“The expression criminal act done by several persons 
includes the case of a number of persons acting together for 
a common object and each doing some act in furtherance 
of the final result which various acts make up the final 
act”, (p. 312 col. 2). 
84.	 In Aydrooss v. Emperor, AIR 1923 Mad 187 (2) (H) it was held that 
in order to justify the application of Section 34, evidence of some 
distinct act by the accused, which can be regarded as part of the 
criminal act in question, must be required. (Vide h.n. (b)). 
85.	 To the same effect are the following observations of Sharpe J. in 
Abdul Kader v. Emperor, AIR 1946 Cal 452 (I) which is a Bench 
decision of the Calcutta High Court: 
“We think it desirable to draw attention to the decision in 
Fazoo Khan v. Jatoo Khan AIR 1931 Cal 643 (J) in which 
it has been observed that ‘all the accused persons can 
180
be found guilty of an offence constructively under Section 
34 of the Penal Code only on a finding that each of them 
took some part or other in, or towards, the commission 
of the offence”. 
86.	 It is true that to convict any particular accused constructively under 
Section 34 of an offence, say of murder, it is not necessary to find 
that he actually struck the fatal blow, or any blow, but there must be 
clear evidence of some action or conduct on his part to show that he 
shared in the common intention of committing murder”, (pp. 457-458). 
87.	 The net result of the above discussion is that although Section 34 
deals with a criminal act which is joint and an intention which is 
common, it cannot be said that it completely ignores or eliminates 
the element of personal contribution of the individual offender in 
both these respects. 
88.	 On the other hand, it is a condition precedent of Section 34, IPC, 
that the individual offender must have participated in the offence in 
both these respects. He must have done something, however slight, 
or conduct himself in some manner, however nebulous whether by 
doing an act or by omitting to do an act so as to indicate that he 
was a participant in the offence and a guilty associate in it. He must 
also be individually a party to an intention which he must share in 
common with others. 
89.	 In other words, he must be a sharer both in the ‘criminal act’ as well 
as in the ‘common intention’ which are the twin aspects of Section 
34, IPC. In view of the above position, it is difficult for the accused 
to legitimately urge before the Court that owing to the mention of 
Section 34, IPC, in the charge, he was misled or prejudiced in his 
defence by being persuaded to presume that all consideration of his 
individual liability was completely shut out as a result thereof. He 
would be presumed to know the law on the point and if, in spite of 
it, he deluded himself into any such belief, he would be doing so at 
his own peril. [See: Om Prakash(supra)]
90.	 As held by this Court in Suresh Sakharam Nangare v. The State of 
Maharashtra, 2012 (9) Judgements Today 116, if common intention is 
proved but no overt act is attributed to the individual accused, Section 
34 of the code will be attracted as essentially it involves vicarious 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
181
Vasant @ Girish Akbarasab Sanavale & Anr.  v. 
The State of Karnataka
liability but if participation of the accused in the crime is proved and 
common intention is absent Section 34 cannot be invoked. In other 
words, it requires a pre-arranged plan and pre supposes prior concert 
therefore there must be meeting of mind.
91.	 Section 106 of the Evidence Act was also pressed into service 
by Mr. Singhvi appearing for the State. We are of the view that it 
has no application in the present case. It is true that when crime 
is alleged to have been committed inside the four walls of the 
house and that too in secrecy then the family members residing 
in the house are the best persons to know and explain as to what 
had actually happened. Let us for the time being proceed on the 
footing that the husband was very much present at the time of 
the incident however there is nothing to indicate that he shared 
common intention with his mother. When the mother-in-law poured 
kerosene on the deceased and set her on fire, it is possible that the 
husband out of sheer fright might have run away from his house 
after trying to extinguish fire by pouring water on the burning body 
of his wife. For applicability of Section 106 so as to implicate the 
husband also in the alleged crime the prosecution has to as a 
condition precedent lay the foundational facts prima facie indicating 
his involvement or participation in the alleged crime. His sudden 
disappearance after the incident is not sufficient to infer common 
intention.
92.	 In the overall view of the matter, we have reached the conclusion 
that the High Court rightly held the mother-in-law guilty of the alleged 
crime. However, the High Court at the same time committed an error 
in holding the husband-appellant no.1 guilty of the offence of murder 
with the aid of Section 34 IPC.
93.	 In the result, this appeal succeeds in part. The judgement and order 
of conviction passed by the High court so far as the appellant no.2 
is concerned is hereby affirmed. So far as the appellant no.1 is 
concerned, the appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. The appellant 
no.1 is acquitted of all the charges.
94.	 We are informed that mother-in-law is already in jail. 
95.	 We are further informed that husband-appellant no.1 is also in jail. 
He shall be released forthwith, if not required, in any other case.
182
96.	 The appeal stands partly allowed in the aforesaid terms.
97.	 Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain