[2025] 12 S.C.R. 281 : 2025 INSC 1374
Commissioner of Customs, Central Excise & 
Service Tax, Rajkot 
v. 
Narsibhai Karamsibhai Gajera & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 3405-3407 of 2012)
02 December 2025
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and  
Atul S. Chandurkar,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the CESTAT fell in error while coming to the conclusion 
that the conversion of grey fabrics to cotton fabrics did not include 
an integral process of stentering undertaken with the aid of power 
and thus the benefit of the Exemption Notification was available 
to Unit No.1. Whether the Order-in-Original rightly considers the 
entire process of manufacture which is conversion of grey fabrics 
into cotton fabrics for being cleared by Unit No.1 as one and 
fastening liability on it.
Headnotes†
Central Excise Act, 1944 – ss.11AB, 11AC, 35-L(b) – 
Appellant’s case that on the basis of information received 
by its intelligence agency Unit No.1 and Unit No.2 were 
processing cotton fabrics with the aid of power but without 
following any of the procedures laid down under the Act of 
1944 as well as the Rules framed thereunder – After taking 
a stock and recording the statements of the partners of Unit 
Nos.1 and 2 along with other employees of both the Units, 
the Commissioner, Customs and Central Excise issued show 
cause notice dated 14.07.2003 on the premise that both the 
Units were not entitled to exemption from paying customs 
duty – He made a demand of excise duty u/s.11-A(1), interest 
on the amount of duty u/s.11AB and penalty u/s.11AC of 
the Act of 1944 – The CESTAT set aside the order of the 
Commissioner – Correctness:
* Author
282
Supreme Court Reports
Held: This Court is of the considered view that the CESTAT fell in 
error while coming to the conclusion that the conversion of grey 
fabrics to cotton fabrics did not include an integral process of 
stentering undertaken with the aid of power and thus the benefit 
of the Exemption Notification was available to Unit No.1 – In the 
present case, the show cause notice indicates that Unit No.1 
was receiving grey fabrics which were thereafter bleached and 
mercerized at the said Unit – The fabric in wet condition was then 
shifted to Unit No.2 and subjected to squeezing and stentering – The 
dry fabrics were thereafter returned to Unit No.1 where they were 
bailed and packed – It was thereafter that the cotton fabrics were 
finally cleared – The CESTAT misdirected itself while emphasizing 
upon the distinct identities of the two Units and in the process 
ignoring the fact that both the Units were together involved in the 
process of manufacture of cotton fabrics from grey fabrics – It 
has come on record that after the grey fabrics were bleached 
and mercerized at Unit No.1, they were taken to Unit No.2 which 
was an adjoining Unit within the same premises – After the wet 
fabrics were subjected to squeezing and stentering at Unit No.2, 
the dry fabrics were brought back to Unit No.1 for being bailed 
and packed – It is clear that the entire activity of undertaking the 
various processes amounted to “manufacture” for the purposes of 
s.2(f) of the Act of 1944 – The CESTAT thus committed an error in 
bifurcating the continuous process of manufacture to come to the 
conclusion that each Unit though undertaking a distinct process 
of manufacture, the activities of one Unit could not be clubbed 
with the other – The Order-in-Original rightly considers the entire 
process of manufacture which is conversion of grey fabrics into 
cotton fabrics for being cleared by Unit No.1 as one and has thus 
fastened liability on it. [Paras 8, 11-13]
Case Law Cited
Steel Authority of India Ltd. v. Directorate General of Anti-Dumping 
& Allied Duties, 2017 INSC 356 : [2017] 6 SCR 598 – held 
inapplicable.
CCE v. Rajasthan State Chemical Works, 1991 INSC 235 : [1991] 
Supp. 1 SCR 124; Impression Prints v. CCE, 2005 INSC 377 : 
[2005] Supp. 2 SCR 904; Standard Fireworks Industries, Sivakasi 
and Another v. Collector of Central Excise (1987) 1 SCC 600 – 
referred to.
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
283
Commissioner of Customs, Central Excise & Service Tax, Rajkot v. 
Narsibhai Karamsibhai Gajera & Ors.
List of Acts
Central Excise Act, 1944.
List of Keywords
Cotton fabrics; Processing cotton fabrics; Electricity connection; 
Industrial electricity connection; Domestic lighting connection; 
Payment of custom duty; Demand of excise duty under Section 
11-A(1) of Central Excise Act, 1944; Interest on the amount of duty 
under Section 11AB of Central Excise Act, 1944; Penalty under 
Section 11AC of Central Excise Act, 1944; Conversion of grey 
fabrics to cotton fabrics; Aid of power.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s).  
3405-3407 of 2012
From the Judgment and Order dated 05.10.2011 of the Customs, 
Excise and Service Appellate Tribunal, Ahmedabad in Order No. 
A/1692-1694 of 2011
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Raghavendra P Shankar, A.S.G., Ms. Nisha Bagchi, Sr. Adv., 
Gurmeet Singh Makker, Karan Lahiri, Digvijay Dam, B K Satija, 
Gaurang Bhushan.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ashish Batra, Wattan Sharma, Nikhil Jain.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Atul S. Chandurkar, J.
1.	
This appeal under Section 35-L (b) of the Central Excise Act, 1944 
(for short, “the Act of 1944”) as it stood prior to its amendment 
by Act 25 of 2014 takes exception to the Order dated 5.10.2011 
passed by the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, 
Ahmedabad (for short, “the CESTAT”). By the said order, the CESTAT 
284
Supreme Court Reports
has set aside the Order-in-Original dated 27.09.2006 passed by 
the Commissioner of Customs and has discharged the show cause 
notice dated 14.07.2003 that was issued to the respondent Nos. 2 
and 3 herein.
2.	
It is the case of the appellant that on the basis of information 
received by its intelligence agency, Bhagyalaxmi Processor Industry 
(hereinafter, Unit No.1) and Famous Textile Packers (hereinafter, 
Unit No.2) were processing cotton fabrics with the aid of power but 
without following any of the procedures laid down under the Act 
of 1944 as well as the Rules framed thereunder. The preventive 
staff carried out a search of both the Units on 21.01.2003 and 
executed a panchnama. It was noted that the factory premises 
of both the Units were situated in a common premises within the 
same compound. Both the Units were having industrial electricity 
connection as well domestic lighting connection. In Unit No.1, a bail 
packing machine with an electric motor, a mercerizing machine as 
well as bleaching machinery were found installed. In the premises 
of Unit No.2, a squeezing machine with electric motor as well as a 
stentering machine fitted with oil engine and driers operated with the 
aid of electric power were found. In the electric room, there were 
five electric meters of which two electric meters were for industrial 
connection, two other meters were for domestic lighting purposes 
while one meter was for the diesel generator set. After taking a stock 
and recording the statements of the partners of Unit Nos.1 and 2 
along with other employees of both the Units, the Commissioner, 
Customs and Central Excise issued show cause notice dated 
14.07.2003 on the premise that both the Units were not entitled to 
exemption from paying customs duty. He made a demand of excise 
duty under Section 11-A(1), interest on the amount of duty under 
Section 11 A B and penalty under Section 11 A C of the Act of 1944. 
Both the Units were called upon to submit their reply to the same.
3.	
Reply to the show cause notice was submitted on 15.12.2005 
denying the contents thereof. It was asserted that cotton fabrics were 
being processed without the aid of any power and hence the Units 
were entitled to exemption in view of Entry No.106 of Notification 
No.5/98-CE. The Commissioner of Central Excise considered the 
entire material and vide Order dated 29.07.2004 held that both the 
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
285
Commissioner of Customs, Central Excise & Service Tax, Rajkot v. 
Narsibhai Karamsibhai Gajera & Ors.
Units were jointly and severally liable to pay the amount of duty 
with interest as well as penalty under the Act of 1944.
The said Units being aggrieved by the aforesaid order preferred an 
appeal before the CESTAT. Vide its order dated 01.07.2005, the 
CESTAT held that the joint and several liability of each Unit could 
not have been fixed. It therefore set aside the Order-in-Original dated 
29.07.2004 and remanded the proceedings to the Commissioner 
for reconsideration.
4.	
After remand, the Commissioner, Central Excise reconsidered the 
entire material. After assessing the evidence on record, he held that 
the statements recorded on 21.01.2003 were sought to be retracted 
by the partners of Unit Nos.1 and 2 after a period of almost six 
months. There was no protest lodged by the noticees immediately 
after the said statements were recorded and hence the retraction 
was by way of an afterthought. He further found that the presence 
of electric motors had been noted in the panchnama and that there 
had been high consumption of electricity and fuel by Unit No.1. 
There was no explanation furnished by Unit No.1 in that regard. It 
was thus held that Unit No.1 was receiving grey cotton fabrics for 
processing. The said fabrics were being bleached and mercerized 
by Unit No.1 with the aid of power. The mercerized and bleached 
fabrics in wet condition were transferred to Unit No.2 where the 
fabrics were squeezed for removing extra water and thereafter 
were processed for stentering. Thereafter, the fabrics were again 
brought back to the premises of Unit No.1 for bailing/folding on the 
machines installed at Unit No.1 that was operated with the aid of 
electric motor. On the completion of this process, the fabrics were 
packed and returned to the customers. Since the entire process 
from receiving the fabrics till their bailing/folding was a continuous 
process, the same was completed with the aid of electricity. Hence, 
the Units were not entitled to claim any exemption under the said 
Notification. The liability to pay duty on the finished fabrics while 
removing the same after the process of bailing and folding was 
of Unit No.1. The show cause notice was accordingly adjudicated 
against Unit No.1 and the demand as made therein was confirmed 
against Unit No.1. The Commissioner also imposed penalty on it 
under Section 11 AC of the Act of 1944.
286
Supreme Court Reports
5.	
Both the Units being aggrieved by the said adjudication again 
approached the CESTAT by filing two appeals. Both the appeals were 
heard together and the CESTAT by its judgment dated 28.09.2011 
proceeded to hold that when the wet fabrics were cleared from Unit 
No.1 and sent to Unit No.2, the said activity was non-excisable. It 
further held that distinct activities of mercerizing and bleaching were 
being carried out at Unit No.1 while the activities of stentering and 
hydro extraction/ drier was carried out at Unit No.2. Both the Units 
were distinct partnership concerns and the clubbing of their activities 
was not justified. It therefore held that the finding recorded by the 
Commissioner that the processes undertaken at Unit Nos.1 and 2 
were liable to be clubbed for deciding accessibility and liability of Unit 
No.1 to pay duty was incorrect. It further held that the subsequent 
affidavits retracting the statements made during the panchnama 
ought to have been taken into consideration. It thereafter held that 
the allegation that there was usage of power during the process of 
mercerizing at Unit No.1 was incorrect. On that basis, the CESTAT 
proceeded to set aside the order of the Commissioner and allowed 
both the appeals. Being aggrieved, the Commissioner of Customs, 
Central Excise and Service Tax has come up in appeal.
6.	
Mr. Raghavendra P. Shankar, learned Additional Solicitor General 
appearing for the appellant submitted that the CESTAT misread 
Entry No.106 of the Exemption Notification dated 02.06.1998 for 
arriving at the conclusion that grey fabrics had been processed to 
cotton fabrics without the aid of power by Unit No.1. According to 
him, the grey fabrics were initially bleached and mercerized at Unit 
No.1. Thereafter the fabrics in wet condition were shifted to Unit 
No.2 and subjected to squeezing and stentering. The dry fabrics 
were thereafter returned to Unit No.1 where they were bailed and 
packed after which the cotton fabrics were cleared. The conversion 
of grey fabrics to a finished product was subjected to “process” with 
the aid of power. Referring to the decisions in CCE Vs. Rajasthan 
State Chemical Works1 and Impression Prints Vs. CCE2, it was 
submitted that if there was use of any power at any of the numerous 
1	
1991 INSC 235
2	
2005 INSC 377
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
287
Commissioner of Customs, Central Excise & Service Tax, Rajkot v. 
Narsibhai Karamsibhai Gajera & Ors.
processes that were required to convert the raw material into a 
finished article, the manufacture would be with the use of power. 
Each of the activities carried out at Unit Nos.1 and 2 were integrally 
connected leading to the final product and hence it could not be said 
that the cotton fabrics were manufactured without the aid of power. 
The CESTAT had failed to be taken into consideration the various 
processes undertaken on the initial grey fabrics till the time of the 
final product was prepared. Referring to the Panchnama that was 
prepared by the Inspection team, it was submitted that the use of 
power during the course of stentering was clearly admitted. Even 
the CESTAT did not disturb the said finding. However, by wrongfully 
holding that the process undertaken at Unit No.2 was not connected 
to the process undertaken at Unit No.1, it proceeded to arrive at a 
wrong conclusion. It was thus clear that the benefit of exemption was 
not available specially when the process of stentering was integrally 
connected with the manufacture of cotton fabrics from grey fabrics. 
As the conclusion drawn by the CESTAT was contrary to the legal 
position settled by this Court, it could not be said that it had taken 
a possible view of the matter. A case was therefore made out to 
interfere with the findings recorded by the CESTAT. Reliance was 
also placed on the decision in Standard Fireworks Industries, 
Sivakasi and another Vs. Collector of Central Excise3. It was 
thus urged that the order passed by the CESTAT be set aside and 
the Order-in-Original passed by the Commissioner be restored.
7.	
On the other hand, Mr. Ashish Batra, learned counsel for the 
respondents supported the order passed by the CESTAT and 
submitted that the benefit of the Exemption Notification dated 
02.06.1998 had been rightly granted to Unit No.1. He submitted 
that Unit No.1 and Unit No.2 were independent in their activities 
and were merely carrying out respective job works. There was no 
unity of ownership of the two Units. Though show cause notice was 
issued to both the Units, the Commissioner proceeded to uphold 
the demand only against Unit No.1. Even if it was presumed that 
there was use of power in the process of stentering at Unit No.2, 
as the show cause notice against it had been dropped, the activities 
3	
(1987) 1 SCC 600
288
Supreme Court Reports
in question carried out at Unit Nos.1 and 2 could not have been 
clubbed. The CESTAT rightly held that insofar as Unit No.1 was 
concerned, there was no use of power. It was then submitted that 
the statements alleged to have been recorded during the course 
of recording the Panchnama had been retracted by filing affidavits. 
The CESTAT rightly ignored the earlier statements and recorded 
a correct finding that there was no use of power during the entire 
process of manufacture. The CESTAT being the final fact finding 
authority and the conclusion recorded by it being one based on the 
material on record, there was no case for interference with the said 
findings. To substantiate this contention, the learned counsel relied 
upon the decision in Steel Authority of India Ltd. Vs. Directorate 
General of Anti-Dumping & Allied Duties4. It was thus submitted 
that there was no merit in the appeal as filed and the same was 
liable to be dismissed. 
8.	
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and 
with their assistance we have perused the documentary material 
on record. Having given due consideration to the same, we are of 
the considered view that the CESTAT fell in error while coming to 
the conclusion that the conversion of grey fabrics to cotton fabrics 
did not include an integral process of stentering undertaken with 
the aid of power and thus the benefit of the Exemption Notification 
was available to Unit No.1. 
9.	
At the outset, it would be necessary to refer to the definition of the 
expression “manufacture” as defined in Section 2(f) of the Act of 
1944 prior to its amendment by Act 18 of 2017. The same reads 
as under:- 
“2(f) ‘Manufacture’ includes any process:- 
(i) incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured 
product; 
(ii) which is specified in relation to any goods in the section 
or Chapter notes of the First Schedule to the Central 
Excise Tariff Act, 1985 as amounting to manufacture; or 
4	
2017 INSC 356
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
289
Commissioner of Customs, Central Excise & Service Tax, Rajkot v. 
Narsibhai Karamsibhai Gajera & Ors.
(iii) which in relation to the goods specified in the Third 
Schedule, involves packing or repacking of such goods 
in a unit container or labelling or re-labelling of containers 
including the declaration or alteration of retail sale price 
on it or adoption of any other treatment on the goods to 
render the product marketable to the consumer;
and the word “manufacture” shall be construed accordingly 
and shall include not only a person who employs hired 
labour in the production or manufacture of excisable goods, 
but also any person who engages in their production or 
manufacture on his own account.” 
Since, Unit No.1 seeks the benefit of Notification No.5/1998-CE and 
especially Entry No.106 therein, the same is reproduced hereunder:- 
S.No.
Chapter or 
heading 
no. or sub 
heading no.
Description of goods
Rate 
Conditions 
106.
52.07, 
52.08 or 
52.09
Cotton fabrics processed 
without the aid of power 
or steam Explanation – 
For the purpose of the 
cotton fabrics subjected 
to the process of colour 
fixation by passing 
steam over such fabrics 
shall be deemed to have 
been processed without 
the aid of steam
10.	 Before adverting to the factual aspects, it would be necessary to 
bear in mind the settled legal position on the aspect “manufacture” 
and “process” in the context of Exemption notifications under the Act 
of 1944. In Standard Fireworks Industries, Sivakasi and another 
(supra), the manufacturers of fireworks sought to claim refund of 
duty on the ground that they were exempted from its payment as 
the manufacturing process was carried out without the aid of power. 
It was found that during the course of manufacture of fireworks, no 
290
Supreme Court Reports
power was used. Power was however used for the shredding of 
paper and cutting of steel wires. The steel wires as well as the paper 
were part of the manufacturing process and used while preparing 
the fireworks. In that context, this Court held that the Exemption 
Notification was applicable only when in relation to the manufacture 
of the goods, no process was ordinarily carried on with the aid of 
power. The cutting of the steel wires and the treatment of paper 
were processes adopted during the manufacture of the fireworks. 
These processes were carried on with the aid of power, though 
outside the factory. On that basis the appellants therein were held 
not entitled to the exemption from payment of duty. 
A Bench of three learned Judges in Collector of Central Excise 
Jaipur (supra) considered a similar Exemption Notification that 
granted exemption when no process of manufacture was carried on 
with the aid of power. Therein, the issue pertained to the process 
of manufacture of common salt from brine in the salt pans. During 
the course of manufacture, brine was pumped into the salt pans 
using diesel pumps. After referring to the definition of the expression 
“manufacture” under the Act of 1944, it was observed as under:-
“13. Manufacture thus involves series of processes. 
Process in manufacture or in relation to manufacture 
implies not only the production but the various stages 
through which the raw material is subjected to change 
by different operations. It is the cumulative effect of the 
various processes to which the raw material is subjected 
to (sic that the) manufactured product emerges. Therefore, 
each step towards such production would be a process in 
relation to the manufacture. Where any particular process 
is so integrally connected with the ultimate production of 
goods that but for that process manufacture or processing 
of goods would be impossible or commercially inexpedient, 
that process is one in relation to the manufacture.
14. The natural meaning of the word ‘process’ is a mode 
of treatment of certain materials in order to produce a 
good result, a species of activity performed on the subject 
matter in order to transform or reduce it to a certain stage. 
According to Oxford Dictionary one of the meanings of 
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
291
Commissioner of Customs, Central Excise & Service Tax, Rajkot v. 
Narsibhai Karamsibhai Gajera & Ors.
the word ‘process’ is “a continuous and regular action 
or succession of actions taking place or carried on in a 
definite manner and leading to the accomplishment of 
some result”. The activity contemplated by the definition 
is perfectly general requiring only the continuous or 
quick succession. It is not one of the requisites that the 
activity should involve some operation on some material 
in order to (sic effect) its conversion to some particular 
stage. There is nothing in the natural meaning of the word 
‘process’ to exclude its application to handling. There 
may be a process which consists only in handling and 
there may be a process which involves no handling or not 
merely handling but use or also use. It may be a process 
involving the handling of the material and it need not be 
a process involving the use of material. The activity may 
be subordinate but one in relation to the further process 
of manufacture.
20. A process is a manufacturing process when it brings 
out a complete transformation for the whole components 
so as to produce a commercially different article or a 
commodity. But, that process itself may consist of several 
processes which may or may not bring about any change 
at every intermediate stage. But the activities or the 
operations may be so integrally connected that the final 
result is the production of a commercially different article. 
Therefore, any activity or operation which is the essential 
requirement and is so related to the further operations for 
the end result would also be a process in or in relation to 
manufacture to attract the relevant clause in the exemption 
notification. In our view, the word ‘process’ in the context 
in which it appears in the aforesaid notification includes 
an operation or activity in relation to manufacture.”
The decision in Standard Fireworks Industries, Sivakasi and 
another (supra) was referred to and a similar view of the matter 
was taken. 
11.	 From the aforesaid decisions, it can be seen that manufacture has 
been held to involve a series of distinct processes. It is the cumulative 
292
Supreme Court Reports
effect of the various processes to which the raw material is subjected 
after which the manufactured product emerges. The requirement is 
that the individual process should be integrally connected with each 
other leading to the ultimate final product. But for each individual 
process, the manufacture or processing of the goods would be 
impossible. A particular activity may be subordinate but related to the 
further process of manufacture. Manufacture thus is the end result 
of one or more processes through which the original commodity 
passes and then becomes the final product. 
In the present case, the show cause notice indicates that Unit No.1 
was receiving grey fabrics which were thereafter bleached and 
mercerized at the said Unit. The fabric in wet condition was then 
shifted to Unit No.2 and subjected to squeezing and stentering. The 
dry fabrics were thereafter returned to Unit No.1 where they were 
bailed and packed. It was thereafter that the cotton fabrics were 
finally cleared. The CESTAT while allowing the appeals preferred 
by both the Units came to the conclusion that the distinct processes 
carried out at Unit Nos.1 and 2 could not have been clubbed together. 
It held that both the Units were independently working on their 
own account and thus their activities were not liable to be clubbed 
together. For reaching that conclusion, the CESTAT was impressed 
by the fact that there was no commonality between the partners 
of both the Units, the machinery employed in both the Units were 
different, the job work bills were separately raised by both the Units 
and that the payments were separately made by them. 
12.	 In our view, the CESTAT misdirected itself while emphasizing upon 
the distinct identities of the two Units and in the process ignoring 
the fact that both the Units were together involved in the process 
of manufacture of cotton fabrics from grey fabrics. It has come on 
record that after the grey fabrics were bleached and mercerized at 
Unit No.1, they were taken to Unit No.2 which was an adjoining Unit 
within the same premises. After the wet fabrics were subjected to 
squeezing and stentering at Unit No.2, the dry fabrics were brought 
back to Unit No.1 for being bailed and packed. When all these 
activities commencing from bleaching and mercerizing thereafter 
leading to squeezing and stentering and culminating into the product 
being bailed and packed being integral processes in the conversion 
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
293
Commissioner of Customs, Central Excise & Service Tax, Rajkot v. 
Narsibhai Karamsibhai Gajera & Ors.
of grey fabrics into cotton fabrics, the fact that the Units undertaking 
these processes were exclusive to each other would hardly make 
any difference. What is to be seen is whether the distinct processes 
undertaken by the two Units formed part of a continuous chain that 
culminated into the final product or not? If the various processes 
were so interlinked with each other that the end product in the form 
of cotton fabrics could not be brought about without undertaking 
each individual process to which the final product was subjected to, 
it would be clear that the entire activity of undertaking the various 
processes amounted to “manufacture” for the purposes of Section 
2(f) of the Act of 1944. Viewed in this context, it is clear that Unit 
No.1 received grey fabrics which were thereafter subjected to various 
processes by Unit Nos.1 and 2 cumulatively resulting in the final 
product which was then cleared by Unit No.1.
13.	 The CESTAT while considering the aspect of use of power by 
the two Units has observed that the process of stentering at Unit 
No.2 with the use of power would not make any difference as the 
demand had not been confirmed against it. This approach ignores 
the fact that the entire process of manufacture has to be taken into 
consideration with the end product falling into the hands of Unit 
No.1 after it was subjected to an integrated process at Unit No.2. 
The demand against Unit No.2 not being confirmed would not be 
relevant in these facts when it is clear that the process of manufacture 
was cumulatively undertaken at Unit Nos.1 and 2 and that the final 
product was being cleared from Unit No.1. We therefore find that 
even on this count, the order passed by the Commissioner did not 
call for any interference as it had taken a correct view on the basis 
of the material on record. The CESTAT thus committed an error in 
bifurcating the continuous process of manufacture to come to the 
conclusion that each Unit though undertaking a distinct process of 
manufacture, the activities of one Unit could not be clubbed with the 
other. The Order-in-Original rightly considers the entire process of 
manufacture which is conversion of grey fabrics into cotton fabrics 
for being cleared by Unit No.1 as one and has thus fastened liability 
on it. A case for interference under Section 35-L (b) of the Act of 
1944 has thus been made out. In these facts therefore the ratio of 
the decision in Steel Authority of India (supra) cannot be made 
applicable to the case in hand. 
294
Supreme Court Reports
14.	 For the aforesaid reasons, the order passed by the CESTAT dated 
05.10.2011 is quashed and set aside and the Order-in-Original 
passed by the Commissioner, Central Excise dated 27.09.2006 
stands restored. The Civil Appeal is thus allowed leaving the parties 
to bear their own costs. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan