[2025] 5 S.C.R. 389 : 2025 INSC 442
UCO Bank & Anr. 
v. 
Vijay Kumar Handa
(Civil Appeal No. 5922 of 2024)
03 April 2025
[Abhay S. Oka and Ujjal Bhuyan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The appellant-Bank dismissed the respondent from the services. 
Whether the respondent was entitled to receive the terminal benefits 
for the period of service he had rendered.
Headnotes†
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 – Industrial Disputes (Central) 
Rules, 1957 – Bipartite Settlement dated 19.10.1966 – Clause 
19.5(c) – UCO Bank (Employees’) Pension Regulations, 
1995 – Respondent was serving as a Clerk in the appellant 
Bank – Respondent was dismissed from the services on 
the charges of indulging in riotous, disorderly and indecent 
behaviour within the premises of the Bank – Appellate Authority 
modified the penalty to the terminal benefits for the period 
of service respondent had rendered – However, the Labour 
Court directed respondent to be reinstated in service with 75 
percent back wages and other benefits – Appellant assailed 
the aforesaid award before the High Court which held that 
the award passed by the Labour Court was totally unjustified 
and could not be sustained – Thereafter, respondent filed writ 
petition for the release of retiral benefits – The Single Judge 
of the High Court held that the respondent would be entitled 
to receive the terminal benefits for the period of service he 
had rendered – The same was affirmed by the Division Bench 
of the High Court – Correctness:
Held: A Bipartite Settlement was arrived at between the Indian Banks’ 
Association and the Banks’ Workmen Union on 19.10.1966 – As per 
the Clause 6(b) of the said Bipartite Settlement, an employee who 
is found guilty of gross misconduct may be removed from service 
but would be provided with superannuation benefits which would 
otherwise be due to him – Further, the penalty of removal from 
* Author
390
Supreme Court Reports
service would be without disqualification from future employment – In 
the instant case, the initial penalty imposed on the respondent by 
the appellant was dismissal from service with immediate effect after 
having been found guilty of gross misconduct as per Clause 19.5(c) 
of the Bipartite Settlement – Appellate authority vide the order dated 
16.02.2000 modified the penalty order dated 14.12.1999 passed 
by the disciplinary authority by substituting the penalty of dismissal 
from service by removal from service with terminal benefits – The 
sequence of events demonstrates that the modified penalty as 
imposed by the appellate authority attained finality as this appellate 
order was not questioned by the appellant – Therefore, objection of 
the appellant to the claim of pension by the respondent was without 
any basis in as much as the appellate authority had specifically 
held that respondent would be entitled to receive terminal benefits 
for the period of service he had rendered – Thus, the respondent 
was entitled to receive pension in view of the order passed by the 
appellate authority. [Paras 17.1, 18, 19, 22]
Case Law Cited
Bank of Baroda v. S.K. Kool [2013] 12 SCR 783 : (2014) 2 SCC 
715 – relied on.
Hardial Singh v. Bank of Baroda, 2012 SCC Online P&H 8059 – 
referred to.
List of Acts
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 
1957; UCO Bank (Employees’) Pension Regulations, 1995.
List of Keywords
Service Law; Dismissal from service; Riotous; Indecent behaviour; 
Gross misconduct; Terminal benefits for service rendered; 
Reinstatement; Back wages; Retiral benefits; Bipartite Settlement; 
Indian Banks’ Association; Banks’ Workmen Union; Superannuation 
benefits; Penalty of removal from service; Claim of pension.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 5922 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 11.01.2017 of the High Court 
of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in LPA No. 1525 of 2016
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
391
UCO Bank & Anr. v. Vijay Kumar Handa
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Ms. Vibha Dutta Makhija, Sr. Adv., Sarfaraz Khan, Kausar Raza 
Faridi, Naved Ahmed, Mirza Amir Beg, Shahbaaz Jameel, Abdul 
Wahid.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Tripurari Ray, Balwant Singh Billowria, Anirudh Ray, Vivekanand 
Singh, Ms. Shilpa Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Ujjal Bhuyan, J.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.	
This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and 
order dated 11.01.2017 passed by the High Court of Punjab and 
Haryana at Chandigarh (briefly ‘the High Court’ hereinafter) dismissing 
Letters Patent Appeal No. 1525 of 2016 preferred by the appellant.
2.1.	 Appellant herein is the United Commercial Bank (briefly ‘the 
Bank’ hereinafter).
3.	
By the judgment and order dated 11.01.2017, the letters patent 
appeal filed by the appellant Bank against the judgment and order 
of the learned Single Judge was dismissed by the Division Bench of 
the High Court. Learned Single Judge vide the judgment and order 
dated 14.03.2016 had allowed the writ petition filed by the respondent 
being Civil Writ Petition No. 2490 of 2014 by directing the appellant 
to process the case of the respondent for pension and to release 
the pensionary dues to him expeditiously.
4.	
Relevant facts may be briefly noted.
5.	
At the relevant point of time, respondent was serving as a Clerk in 
the appellant Bank. A charge memo dated 12.10.1998 issued by 
the disciplinary authority was served upon him, charging him with 
having indulged in acts of gross misconduct within the premises 
of the Gurmandi Branch, Jalandhar of the appellant Bank. As per 
the allegations, on 21.09.1998, at around 05:15 PM, respondent 
392
Supreme Court Reports
alongwith another employee of the same branch Shri R.N. Chopra 
had assaulted Shri J.B. Bansal, an officer of the appellant Bank posted 
at the Raipur-Rasulpur Branch, in the cabin of the senior manager 
of the Gurmandi Branch. Officials of the branch had to intervene to 
separate Shri Bansal from the respondent and Shri Chopra. 
5.1.	 Before the respondent could file his response to the charge 
memo, the disciplinary authority decided to institute an enquiry. 
In this connection, Shri H.S. Saini, an officer in Scale III, was 
appointed as the Enquiry Officer and Shri R.K. Kakkar, an 
officer in Scale II, was appointed as the Presiding Officer vide 
the notification dated 18.12.1998. 
5.2.	 The Enquiry Officer conducted the enquiry and on conclusion 
of the same submitted his enquiry report to the disciplinary 
authority alongwith his covering letter dated 09.10.1999. In the 
enquiry proceedings, stand of the respondent was that no such 
incident of assault had taken place; instead, it was a conspiracy 
hatched at the instance of the rival union to falsely implicate 
the respondent and Shri Chopra. Enquiry Officer concluded that 
the charges against the respondent stood proved.
5.3.	 On going through the enquiry report, disciplinary authority 
passed an order dated 18.10.1999 holding that the charge 
against the respondent of indulging in riotous, disorderly and 
indecent behaviour within the premises of the Bank was proved. 
Therefore, as the disciplinary authority, he proposed to impose 
the penalty of dismissal from service. A copy of the enquiry 
report was forwarded to the respondent with the intimation 
that a personal hearing would be held on 29.10.1999 on the 
question of penalty.
5.4.	 It appears that respondent had appeared before the disciplinary 
authority for personal hearing and also filed a written submission. 
He reiterated that he was innocent and was falsely implicated. 
He submitted he had two small school going children besides 
his unemployed wife. Therefore, he pleaded that the penalty 
as proposed should not be imposed.
5.5.	 Disciplinary authority vide his order dated 14.12.1999 agreed 
with the findings of the Enquiry Officer and held that the charge 
levelled against the respondent for having indulged in riotous, 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
393
UCO Bank & Anr. v. Vijay Kumar Handa
disorderly and indecent behaviour within the premises of the 
appellant Bank was proved. Respondent thus committed an 
act of gross misconduct within the meaning of Clause 19.5(c) 
of the Bipartite Settlement dated 19.10.1966, as amended. He, 
therefore, imposed the penalty of dismissal from service on the 
respondent with immediate effect.
6.	
Respondent preferred an appeal against the aforesaid order of 
dismissal from service before the appellate authority. By order dated 
16.02.2000, the appellate authority while concurring with the finding 
of the disciplinary authority qua the misconduct, however modified the 
penalty to one of removal from service. It was ordered that respondent 
be removed from the services of the Bank with immediate effect; 
however, he would be entitled to receive the terminal benefits for the 
period of service he had rendered. It was clarified that removal from 
service would not be a disqualification for the future employment of 
the respondent.
7.	
On an industrial dispute being raised at the instance of the respondent, 
the central government referred the same to the Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Jalandhar (for short ‘Labour 
Court’ hereinafter). The question referred was whether the action of 
the Bank in dismissing the respondent from service was legal and 
just. The supplementary question was as to what relief the concerned 
workman (respondent) would be entitled to and from which stage. 
Labour Court after hearing the matter passed an award dated 
13.02.2004 opining that the penalty imposed was disproportionate to 
the gravity of the alleged misconduct by taking into consideration the 
involvement of the respondent in the alleged incident. Invoking the 
provisions of Section 11A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (briefly, 
‘the Industrial Disputes Act’ hereinafter), the Labour Court substituted 
the penalty of dismissal/removal from service with the penalty of 
stoppage of four increments for one year. Respondent was directed 
to be reinstated in service with 75 percent back wages and other 
benefits. The reference was answered accordingly. The aforesaid 
award was notified by the central government on 07.03.2004.
8.	
Appellant assailed the aforesaid award dated 13.02.2004 before the 
High Court by filing CWP No. 11806 of 2004. A learned Single Judge 
of the High Court vide the judgment and order dated 25.03.2009 was 
of the view that the award passed by the Labour Court was totally 
394
Supreme Court Reports
unjustified and could not be sustained. Power under Section 11A of 
the Industrial Disputes Act ought not to have been invoked by the 
Labour Court. Punishment of removal from service with terminal 
benefits as imposed on the respondent by the appellate authority 
could not be said to be disproportionate. Therefore, the award dated 
13.02.2004 was set aside.
9.	
Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order of the learned Single 
Judge dated 25.03.2009, respondent preferred a letters patent appeal 
being LPA No. 928 of 2009 before the Division Bench of the High 
Court. Vide the judgment and order dated 24.02.2010, the Division 
Bench agreed with the view taken by the learned Single Judge that 
power under Section 11A of the Industrial Disputes Act ought not to 
have been invoked by the Labour Court. Consequently, the appeal 
was dismissed.
10.	 Respondent filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution 
of India before the High Court seeking a direction to the appellant 
to release his retiral benefits. The same was registered as Civil 
Writ Petition No. 2490 of 2014. A learned Single Judge of the High 
Court vide the judgment and order dated 14.03.2016 referred to the 
order of the appellate authority wherein the latter had held that the 
respondent would be entitled to receive the terminal benefits for the 
period of service he had rendered and thereafter allowed the said 
writ petition by directing the appellant Bank to process the case of 
the respondent for pension in pursuance of the option exercised by 
him and to release the pensionary benefits due to him expeditiously.
11.	 Appellant preferred LPA No. 1525 of 2016 before the Division Bench 
challenging the aforesaid decision of the learned Single Judge dated 
14.03.2016. A Division Bench of the High Court vide the judgment 
and order dated 11.01.2017 placed reliance on a decision of this 
Court in Bank of Baroda Vs. S.K. Kool1 and another decision of 
the High Court in Hardial Singh Vs. Bank of Baroda2 and thereafter 
affirmed the view taken by the learned Single Judge. Consequently, 
the letters patent appeal of the appellant was dismissed.
12.	 Hence the present appeal.
1	
(2014) 2 SCC 715
2	
2012 SCC Online P&H 8059
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
395
UCO Bank & Anr. v. Vijay Kumar Handa
13.	 This Court by order dated 03.07.2017 had issued notice and stayed 
the operation and implementation of the impugned judgment and 
order dated 11.01.2017. When the matter was heard on 23.04.2024, 
leave was granted.
14.	 Learned senior counsel for the appellant submits that respondent 
was not punished under Clause 6(b) of the Bipartite Settlement. 
Therefore, the High Court was not justified in applying the case of 
S.K. Kool (supra). That apart, the decision in S.K. Kool (supra) was 
rendered in a different factual context. The employee in the said case 
had opted for pension before the penalty of removal from service 
was imposed on him. In the present case, respondent never opted 
for pension. Therefore, S.K. Kool (supra) is clearly distinguishable 
in so far facts and circumstances of the present case is concerned. 
14.1.	 Learned senior counsel further submits that respondent 
was not entitled to pension in as much as he did not fulfil 
the requirements of pension in terms of the ninth Bipartite 
Settlement dated 27.04.2010. The said settlement did not 
include employees who had suffered the penalty of removal 
from service as being eligible for pension.
14.2.	 In any view of the matter, learned senior counsel submits that a 
delinquent employee who has been imposed the major penalty 
of removal from service is not entitled to pension or other retiral 
benefits. The charge against the respondent is very serious 
and that was proved in the duly constituted enquiry. Regulation 
22 of the UCO Bank (Employees’) Pension Regulations, 1995 
(for short ‘Regulations, 1995’ hereinafter) also does not permit 
grant of pension to such delinquent employees.
14.3.	 In such circumstances, learned senior counsel submits that 
the High Court fell in error in directing the appellant to grant 
pension to the respondent. Therefore, the impugned order 
should be set aside.
15.	 Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent submits that both the 
learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court had 
correctly appreciated the facts and the law and thereafter upheld 
the claim of the respondent.
15.1.	 Learned counsel for the respondent heavily relied upon the 
decision of this Court in S.K. Kool (supra) and submits that 
396
Supreme Court Reports
respondent having completed the minimum pensionable years 
of service, he is entitled to the pensionary benefits.
15.2.	 It is further submitted that the appellate authority while 
maintaining the finding of the disciplinary authority in so far 
the finding of misconduct of the respondent is concerned, 
however held that the respondent would be entitled to receive 
the terminal benefits for the period of service he had rendered. 
Appellant did not challenge this decision. On the contrary, 
appellant had challenged the subsequent Labour Court award 
substituting the same with a lesser penalty and directing re-
instatement in service. This challenge was sustained by the 
Single Judge as well as by the Division Bench of the High Court, 
thus restoring the appellate order. Therefore, the appellate 
order had attained finality. On the strength of the appellate 
order, respondent is entitled to pension and this is what the 
High Court in the subsequent round has held. Learned counsel, 
therefore, submits that there is no merit in the appeal and, as 
such, the appeal should be dismissed. 
16.	 Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties have received 
the due consideration of the Court.
17.	 A Bipartite Settlement was arrived at between the Indian Banks’ 
Association and the Banks’ Workmen Union on 19.10.1966. This 
settlement was arrived at under Section 2(p) and Section 18(1) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act read with Rule 58 of the Industrial Disputes 
(Central) Rules, 1957. This settlement therefore has a statutory 
backing and is binding on the parties. Respondent was charged 
with committing an act of gross misconduct as defined in Clause 
19.5(c) of the aforesaid Bipartite Settlement which was proved by 
the Enquiry Officer and accepted by the disciplinary authority. On 
10.04.2002, a further settlement was arrived at between the Indian 
Banks’ Association, representing the management on the one hand, 
and the workmen represented by the All India Bank Employees’ 
Association, National Confederation of Bank employees and Indian 
National Bank Employees’ Federation on the other hand. Pursuant 
thereto, Clause 6(b) was inserted in the said Bipartite Settlement 
providing for one of the penalties which may be imposed on a 
delinquent employee found guilty of gross misconduct. Clause 6(b) 
reads as follows:
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
397
UCO Bank & Anr. v. Vijay Kumar Handa
6. An employee found guilty of gross misconduct may:
(a)
*
*
*
*
*
(b) be removed from service with superannuation benefits 
i.e. pension and/or provident fund and gratuity as would 
be due otherwise under the rules or regulations prevailing 
at the relevant time and without disqualification from 
future employment; or
17.1.	 Thus, as per the aforesaid clause, an employee who is found 
guilty of gross misconduct may be removed from service but 
would be provided with superannuation benefits which would 
otherwise be due to him. Further, the penalty of removal 
from service would be without disqualification from future 
employment.
18.	 In the instant case, the initial penalty imposed on the respondent by 
the appellant was dismissal from service with immediate effect after 
having been found guilty of gross misconduct as per Clause 19.5(c) 
of the Bipartite Settlement. Appellate authority vide the order dated 
16.02.2000 modified the penalty order dated 14.12.1999 passed 
by the disciplinary authority by substituting the penalty of dismissal 
from service by removal from service with terminal benefits. The 
substituted penalty in terms of the appellate order dated 16.02.2000 
reads as under:
Shri V.K. Handa (PFM No. 22488) is hereby removed from 
the bank’s service with immediate effect. However, he will 
be entitled to receive the terminal benefits for the period 
of service he has rendered. Removal from service will not 
be a disqualification for his future employment.
19.	 We have already seen that respondent had raised an industrial 
dispute which culminated in an award dated 13.02.2004. As per this 
award, Labour Court had invoked the provisions of Section 11A of 
the Industrial Disputes Act and substituted the penalty of removal 
from service with terminal benefits by the penalty of stoppage of 
four increments for one year with further direction for reinstatement 
in service with 75 percent back wages. This award of the Labour 
Court failed to stand judicial scrutiny as learned Single Judge of the 
High Court set aside the same which decision was affirmed by the 
Division Bench in letters patent appeal. This sequence of events 
398
Supreme Court Reports
demonstrates that the modified penalty as imposed by the appellate 
authority attained finality as this appellate order was not questioned 
by the appellant.
20.	 Learned senior counsel for the appellant in the course of her 
submissions placed reliance on Regulation 22 of the Regulations, 
1995. Regulation 22(1) of the aforesaid regulations reads thus:
22. Forfeiture of service.-(1) Resignation or dismissal or 
removal or termination of an employee from the service 
of the Bank shall entail forfeiture of his entire past service 
and consequently shall not qualify for pensionary benefits.
20.1.	 According to her, in view of Regulation 22, the respondent 
would not be entitled to pension.
21.	 Interplay of Clause 6(b) of the Bipartite Settlement and Regulation 
22 of the Regulations, 1995 was examined by this Court in S.K. 
Kool (supra) and after due consideration answered the same in the 
following manner: 
13. …….From a plain reading of the aforesaid Regulation, 
it is evident that removal of an employee shall entail 
forfeiture of his entire past service and consequently such 
an employee shall not qualify for pensionary benefits. If we 
accept this submission, no employee removed from service 
in any event would be entitled for pensionary benefits. 
But the fact of the matter is that the Bipartite Settlement 
provides for removal from service with pensionary benefits 
“as would be due otherwise under the rules or regulations 
prevailing at the relevant time”. The consequence of this 
construction would be that the words quoted above shall 
become a dead letter. Such a construction has to be 
avoided.
14. The Regulations do not entitle every employee 
to pensionary benefits. Its application and eligibility is 
provided under Chapter II of the Regulations whereas 
Chapter IV deals with qualifying service. An employee 
who has rendered a minimum of ten years of service 
and fulfils other conditions only can qualify for pension 
in terms of Regulation 14 of the Regulations. Therefore, 
the expression “as would be due otherwise” would mean 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
399
UCO Bank & Anr. v. Vijay Kumar Handa
only such employees who are eligible and have put in 
minimum number of years of service to qualify for pension. 
However, such of the employees who are not eligible and 
have not put in required number of years of qualifying 
service shall not be entitled to the superannuation benefits 
though removed from service in terms of Clause 6(b) of 
the Bipartite Settlement. Clause 6(b) came to be inserted 
as one of the punishments on account of the Bipartite 
Settlement. It provides for payment of superannuation 
benefits as would be due otherwise.
15. The Bipartite Settlement tends to provide a punishment 
which gives superannuation benefits otherwise due. The 
construction canvassed by the employer shall give nothing 
to the employees in any event. Will it not be a fraud 
Bipartite Settlement? Obviously it would be. From the 
conspectus of what we have observed we have no doubt 
that such of the employees who are otherwise eligible 
for superannuation benefit are removed from service 
in terms of Clause 6(b) of the Bipartite Settlement shall 
be entitled to superannuation benefits. This is the only 
construction which would harmonise the two provisions. It 
is well-settled rule of construction that in case of apparent 
conflict between the two provisions, they should be so 
interpreted that the effect is given to both. Hence, we are of 
the opinion that such of the employees who are otherwise 
entitled to superannuation benefits under the Regulations 
if visited with the penalty of removal from service with 
superannuation benefits shall be entitled for those benefits 
and such of the employees though visited with the same 
penalty but are not eligible for superannuation benefits 
under the Regulations shall not be entitled to that.
22.	 Both the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench had followed 
the aforesaid decision of this Court. Learned Single Judge noted 
that respondent had submitted his option for pension on 05.10.2010. 
Learned Single Judge also held that objection of the appellant to 
the claim of pension by the respondent was without any basis in as 
much as the appellate authority had specifically held that respondent 
would be entitled to receive terminal benefits for the period of service 
he had rendered. This order of the appellate authority has attained 
400
Supreme Court Reports
finality. Therefore, it was held that respondent was entitled to receive 
pension in view of the order passed by the appellate authority. This 
view of the learned Single Judge has been endorsed by the Division 
Bench in the impugned judgment. The decision in S.K. Kool (supra) 
is binding on us. Therefore, we do not find any compelling reason 
to interfere with the concurrent findings of the learned Single Judge 
and the Division Bench while exercising our jurisdiction under Article 
136 of the Constitution of India.
23.	 Accordingly, the civil appeal is dismissed. However, there shall be 
no order as to cost.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan