[2025] 9 S.C.R. 542 : 2025 INSC 1084
Union of India & Ors. 
v. 
Sajib Roy
(Civil Appeal No. 11718 of 2025)
09 September 2025
[Surya Kant and Joymalya Bagchi,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the correctness of the order by the High 
Court permitting the respondents who had applied as reserved 
candidates in OBC category after having availed age relaxation 
for the post of Constable, to be considered for recruitment under 
unreserved category.
Headnotes†
Service law – Recruitment – Appointment of OBC candidate 
to unreserved candidate – Permissibility – Recruitment of 
Constables – OBC candidates availed age relaxation for 
participation in the recruitment process, however, declared 
unsuccessful as they had scored marks lower than the last 
selected candidate in the OBC category, but their marks were 
higher than the last selected candidate in the unreserved 
category – OBC candidates sought migration to the unreserved 
category – High Court held that the writ petitioners-OBC 
candidates who had applied as reserved candidates in OBC 
category after having availed age relaxation for the post 
of Constable (GD) to be considered for recruitment under 
unreserved category – Correctness:
Held: Whether a reserved candidate who has availed relaxation 
in fees/upper age limit to participate in open competition with 
general candidates may be recruited against unreserved seats 
would depend on the facts of each case – In the event there 
is no embargo in the recruitment rules/employment notification, 
such reserved candidates who have scored higher than the last 
selected unreserved candidate shall be entitled to migrate and 
be recruited against unreserved seats – However, if an embargo 
is imposed under relevant recruitment rules, such reserved 
candidates shall not be permitted to migrate to general category 
* Author
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
543
Union of India & Ors. v. Sajib Roy
seats – As the respondents-writ petitioners had availed concession 
of age for participating in the recruitment process, in the teeth 
of office memorandum dated 01.07.1998 which clearly barred 
such migration in the event the reserved candidates had availed 
relaxations in age, experience qualification, etc, the High Court 
erred in applying the ratio in Jitendra Kumar’s case wherein by 
virtue of the government instructions dated 25.03.1994 expressly 
permitted reserved candidates who have availed relaxation in fees/
upper age limit etc. to be considered for appointment in unreserved 
category – Thus, the impugned judgment and order by the High 
Court set aside. [Paras 32, 33]
Case Law Cited
Jitendra Kumar Singh & Anr v. State of UP & Ors. [2010] 1 SCR 
325 : (2010) 3 SCC 119 – distinguished.
Haryana Financial Corporation & Anr v. Jagdamba Oil Mills & Anr. 
[2002] 1 SCR 621 : (2002) 3 SCC 496; Deepa E. V. v. Union of 
India & Ors. [2017] 1 SCR 938 : (2017) 12 SCC 680; Gaurav 
Pradhan & Ors. v. State of Rajasthan & Ors. [2017] 8 SCR 951 : 
(2018) 11 SCC 352; Niravkumar Dilipbhai Makwana v. Gujarat 
Public Service Commission & Ors. [2019] 9 SCR 47 : (2019) 7 
SCC 383; Government (NCT of Delhi) & Ors. v. Pradeep Kumar & 
Ors. [2019] 13 SCR 1056 : (2019) 10 SCC 120; Vikas Sankhala 
& Ors. v. Vikas Kumar Agarwal & Ors. [2016] 7 SCR 639 : (2017) 
1 SCC 350; Saurav Yadav & Ors. v. State of UP & Ors. [2020] 11 
SCR 281 : (2021) 4 SCC 542; Ajithkumar P. & Ors. v. Remin K. R. 
& Ors. (2015) 16 SCC 778; Sadhana Singh Dangi & Ors. v. Pinki 
Asati & Ors. (2022) 12 SCC 401; Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
& Anr. v. Sandeep Chaudhary & Ors. [2022] 4 SCR 1002 : (2022) 
11 SCC 779 – referred to.
Quinn v. Leathem [1901] AC 495 (HL) – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Reserved candidates; OBC category; Age relaxation; Post of 
Constable; Recruitment; Unreserved category; Jitendra Kumar’s 
case; Office memorandum dated 01.07.1998; Migration of reserved 
candidates; Concessions in the form of age relaxation; Appointment 
544
Supreme Court Reports
in unreserved category; Recruitment process; Last selected 
candidate; Migration to unreserved category; Recruitment rules/
employment notification; General category; Government instructions 
dated 25.03.1994.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 11718 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 12.10.2018 and 26.02.2019 
of the High Court of Tripura at Agarthala in WP(C) No. 281 of 2017 
and RP No. 04 of 2019
With
Civil Appeal Nos. 11720, 11722, and 11724 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Shailesh Madiyal, Sr. Adv., Ms. Priyanka Das, Rajan Kumar 
Chourasia, Apoorva Kurup, Mukul Singh, Pratyush Srivastav, 
Sharath Narayan Nambiar, Ashok Panigrahi, Shreekant Neelappa 
Terdal.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Dr. Nirmal Chopra, T. N. Singh, Vikas K. Singh, Dr. Sham Chand, 
Shubhranshu Padhi, Jay Nirupam, D. Girish Kumar, Pranav Giri, 
Ekansh Sisodia, Ms. Manika Tripathy, Ashutosh Kaushik.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Joymalya Bagchi, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
Appellants have assailed common impugned judgment and order 
dated 12.10.20181 and order dated 26.02.20192 whereby the 
respondents-writ petitioners who had applied as reserved candidates 
1	
In WP (C) No. 277/2017, WP (C) No. 279/2017, WP (C) No. 280/2017 and WP (C) No. 281/2017
2	
In Review Application No. 3/2019, Review Application No. 4/2019, Review Application No. 5/2019 and 
Review Application No. 6/2019
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
545
Union of India & Ors. v. Sajib Roy
in OBC category after having availed age relaxation for the post of 
Constable (GD) were directed to be considered for recruitment under 
unreserved category. 
3.	
Facts in a short compass giving rise to the appeals are as follows –
Staff Selection Commission3 published employment notification for 
recruitment of Constables (GD) in BSF, CRPF, ITBP, SSB, NIA and 
SSF and Rifleman in Assam Rifles comprising physical test, written 
examination and medical examination. As per the employment 
notification, the prescribed age limit for eligible candidates to participate 
in the recruitment process was 18 to 23 years as on 01.08.2015 and 
age relaxation was given to various reserved candidates4. For OBC 
candidates, i.e., the respondents-writ petitioners, age relaxation was 
3 years5. 
4.	
All the respondents-writ petitioners availed of such age relaxation for 
participation in the recruitment process. However, they were declared 
unsuccessful as they had scored marks lower than the last selected 
candidate in the OBC category for various departments. But their 
marks were higher than the last selected candidate in the unreserved 
category for those departments. Claiming that they ought to be 
permitted to migrate to the unreserved category, the respondents-
writ petitioners approached the High Court. Union of India opposed 
the prayer on the ground that the respondents-writ petitioners had 
applied in the OBC category after availing age relaxation and under 
such circumstances cannot be considered eligible for appointment 
in unreserved category. 
5.	
Relying on Jitendra Kumar Singh & Anr v. State of UP & Ors6, 
the High Court held that the refusal to permit respondents-writ 
petitioners to migrate to the unreserved category though they scored 
higher than the last candidate in such category runs counter to the 
principles of merit-based recruitment in public services and would 
be opposed to the principles of equality enshrined under Article 14 
of the Constitution. The High Court further held that relaxations in 
fee and age for reserved candidates to participate in the selection 
3	
SSC for short
4	
Employment Notification no. F. No.3/1/2014–P&P-I (vol-II), Para 4A 
5	
Para 4B of the aforementioned notification
6	
(2010) 3 SCC 119
546
Supreme Court Reports
process are concessions in aid of reservation and do not impair the 
‘level-playing field’ in the open competition, i.e., written examination 
where such candidates have scored more than those selected under 
the unreserved category. 
6.	
Subsequently, Union of India by way of a review petition placed 
on record an office memorandum no. 36011/1/98-Estt. (Res) dated 
01.07.1998 which inter alia provided that SC/ST/OBC candidates 
who have availed relaxations in age limit, experience qualification 
or number of chances in written examinations would be deemed 
unavailable for consideration against the unreserved vacancies. 
Notwithstanding such office memorandum the High Court refused to 
review its judgment and the review petition came to be dismissed. 
7.	
We have heard Mr. Shailesh Madiyal, learned senior counsel for the 
appellants and Dr. Nirmal Chopra and Ms. Manika Tripathy, learned 
counsel for the respondents-writ petitioners.
8.	
The moot issue which falls for consideration is did the High Court 
err in applying the ratio in Jitendra Kumar (supra) in the teeth of the 
office memorandum dated 01.07.1998 which put a clog on migration 
of reserved candidates who have availed concessions in the form of 
age relaxation for appointment in unreserved category? 
9.	
In Jitendra Kumar (supra) this Court was called upon to decide 
whether availing relaxation in fees/upper age limit in the reserved 
category would disentitle such candidates from being considered for 
appointment in the unreserved seats. The Bench held such relaxations 
in fee or age were incidental and ancillary provisions which made 
the core concept of reservation under Article 16(4) effective. Such 
enlargement of zone of consideration by giving concession in fees/
upper age limit were merely an ‘aid to reservation’ and enabled the 
reserved candidate to participate with others in an open competition 
on merit. These concessions did not affect the level-playing field 
in the recruitment process wherein both reserved and unreserved 
candidates competed against each other without handicap. The 
Bench elucidated as follows:-
“75. In our opinion, the relaxation in age does not in any 
manner upset the “level playing field”. It is not possible 
to accept the submission of the learned counsel for the 
appellants that relaxation in age or the concession in fee 
would in any manner be infringement of Article 16(1) of 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
547
Union of India & Ors. v. Sajib Roy
the Constitution of India. These concessions are provisions 
pertaining to the eligibility of a candidate to appear in the 
competitive examination. At the time when the concessions 
are availed, the open competition has not commenced. It 
commences when all the candidates who fulfil the eligibility 
conditions, namely, qualifications, age, preliminary written 
test and physical test are permitted to sit in the main written 
examination. With age relaxation and the fee concession, 
the reserved candidates are merely brought within the 
zone of consideration, so that they can participate in the 
open competition on merit. Once the candidate participates 
in the written examination, it is immaterial as to which 
category, the candidate belongs. All the candidates to 
be declared eligible had participated in the preliminary 
test as also in the physical test. It is only thereafter that 
successful candidates have been permitted to participate 
in the open competition.”
10.	 Having propounded the aforesaid general principles, the Bench 
proceeded to decide the case in light of the relevant recruitment rules:-
“65. In any event the entire issue in the present appeals 
need not be decided on the general principles of law laid 
down in various judgments as noticed above. In these 
matters, we are concerned with the interpretation of the 
1994 Act, the Instructions dated 25-3-1994 and the G.O. 
dated 26-2-1999. The controversy herein centres around 
the limited issue as to whether an OBC who has applied 
exercising his option as a reserved category candidate, 
thus becoming eligible to be considered against a reserved 
vacancy, can also be considered against an unreserved 
vacancy if he/she secures more marks than the last 
candidate in the general category.”
11.	 It is clear that the decision in Jitendra Kumar (supra) is not founded 
on the general principles but on the interpretation of the relevant 
statute7, government order8 and instructions9 regulating the selection 
7	
The U.P. Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward 
Classes) Act, 1994 (1994 Act for short)
8	
GO dated 26.02.1999
9	
Instructions dated 25.03.1994
548
Supreme Court Reports
process. It may not be out of place to note Section 8 (1) of the 1994 Act 
empowered the State Government to grant concessions in respect of 
age limit, fees for reserved categories in any competitive examination 
or interview. The government instructions dated 25.03.1994 permitted 
reserved candidates availing such concessions to be adjusted against 
unreserved seats10.
12.	 In light of such government instructions the Bench held:- 
“72. ……From the above it becomes quite apparent that 
the relaxation in age-limit is merely to enable the reserved 
category candidate to compete with the general category 
candidate, all other things being equal. The State has 
not treated the relaxation in age and fee as relaxation 
in the standard for selection, based on the merit of the 
candidate in the selection test i.e. main written test followed 
by interview.” 
13.	 The ratio in Jitendra Kumar (supra) is clearly distinguishable on facts. 
The recruitment process at hand is regulated by office memorandum 
dated 01.07.1998 which bars the migration of a reserved candidate. 
Office memorandum reads as follows:-
“No.36011/1/98-Estt. (Res)
Ministry of Personnel, P.G. & Pensions 
Department of Personnel & Training
New Delhi Dated 01.07.1998
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Relaxations and concessions for SCs and STs 
clarification regarding.
The undersigned is directed to refer to this Department’s 
O.M.No.36012/13/88-Estt. (SCT) dated May 22, 1989 and 
to clarify that the instructions contained in the C.M. apply in 
all types of direct recruitment whether by written test alone 
or written test followed by interview or by interview alone.
10	
4. If any person belonging to reserved categories is selected on the basis of merits in open competition 
along with general category candidates, then he will not be adjusted towards reserved category, that is, 
he shall be deemed to have been adjusted against the unreserved vacancies. It shall be immaterial that 
he has availed any facility or relaxation (like relaxation in age-limit) available to reserved category.
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
549
Union of India & Ors. v. Sajib Roy
2. O.M. dated May 22, 1989 referred to above and the
O.M. No. 36012/2/96-ESTT(RES) dated July 2, 1997 
provide that in cases of direct recruitment, the SC/ST/
OBC candidates who are selected on their own merit will 
not be adjusted against reserved vacancies.
3. In this connection, it is clarified that only such SC/ST/
OBC candidates who are selected on the same standard 
as applied to general candidates shall not be adjusted 
against reserved vacancies. In other words, when a relaxed 
standard is applied in selecting an SC/ST/OBC candidates 
for example in the age limit, experience qualification, 
permitted number of chances in written examination, 
extended zone of consideration larger then what is provided 
for general category candidates etc. the SC/ST/OBC 
candidates are to be counted against reserved vacancies. 
Such candidates would be deemed as unavailable for 
consideration against unreserved vacancies.
14.	 It may be apposite to bear in mind the respondents-writ petitioners 
have without demur participated in the selection process and had 
not called in question the constitutional validity of the aforementioned 
office memorandum.
15.	 Given this situation, the High Court erred in mechanically applying 
the ratio in Jitendra Kumar (supra) to the present case without 
appreciating the difference in the factual matrix of the present 
case with the cited authority. While in Jitendra Kumar (supra) the 
government instructions dated 25.03.1994 expressly permitted 
reserved candidates who have availed relaxation in fees/upper age 
limit etc. to be considered for appointment in unreserved category, 
office memorandum dated 01.07.1998 clearly barred such migration 
in the event the reserved candidates had availed relaxations in age, 
experience qualification, etc. 
16.	 It is trite the ratio in a judgment must be read in the facts of a 
particular case and cannot have universal application. In Quinn v. 
Leathem11, Lord Halsbury remarked:-
11	
[1901] AC 495 (HL)
550
Supreme Court Reports
“….there are two observations of a general character 
which I wish to make, and one is to repeat what I have 
very often said before, that every judgment must be read 
as applicable to the particular facts proved, or assumed to 
be proved, since the generality of the expressions which 
may be found there are not intended to be expositions of 
the whole law, but governed and qualified by the particular 
facts of the case in which such expressions are to be found. 
The other is that a case is only an authority for what it 
actually decides. I entirely deny that it can be quoted for a 
proposition that may seem to follow logically from it. Such 
a mode of reasoning assumes that the law is necessarily 
a logical code, whereas every lawyer must acknowledge 
that the law is not always logical at all.”
17.	 In Haryana Financial Corporation & Anr v. Jagdamba Oil Mills & 
Anr12, the Court held:-
“21. Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact 
may make a world of difference between conclusions in 
two cases. Disposal of cases by blindly placing reliance 
on a decision is not proper.
22. The following words of Hidayatullah, J. in the matter of 
applying precedents have become locus classicus: (Abdul 
Kayoom v. CIT, AIR p. 688, para 19)
“19. … Each case depends on its own facts and 
a close similarity between one case and another 
is not enough because even a single significant 
detail may alter the entire aspect. In deciding 
such cases, one should avoid the temptation to 
decide cases (as said by Cardozo) by matching 
the colour of one case against the colour of 
another. To decide, therefore, on which side of 
the line a case falls, the broad resemblance to 
another case is not at all decisive.”
***
***
***
***
12	
(2002) 3 SCC 496
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
551
Union of India & Ors. v. Sajib Roy
“Precedent should be followed only so far as 
it marks the path of justice, but you must cut 
the dead wood and trim off the side branches 
else you will find yourself lost in thickets and 
branches. My plea is to keep the path to justice 
clear of obstructions which could impede it.”
18.	 Whether the general observations in Jitendra Kumar (supra) could 
be treated as a binding precedent in respect of recruitment process 
where such migration is not permitted is no longer res integra. 
19.	 In Deepa E. V. v. Union of India & Ors13, a two judge Bench of this 
Court taking note of self-same office memorandum applicable in 
the present case held the ratio in Jitendra Kumar (supra) pertained 
to interpretation of the 1994 Act and government instructions dated 
25.03.1994 and general principles made therein were inapplicable 
to a recruitment process where such migration is not permitted. The 
Bench observed:-
“8. The learned counsel for the appellant mainly relied 
upon the judgment of this Court in Jitendra Kumar Singh 
v. State of U.P, which deals with the U.P. Public Services 
(Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994 and Government Order 
dated 25-3-1994. On a perusal of the above judgment, we 
find that there is no express bar in the said U.P. Act for the 
candidates of SC/ST/OBC being considered for the posts 
under general category. In such facts and circumstances 
of the said case, this Court has taken the view that the 
relaxation granted to the reserved category candidates will 
operate a level playing field. In the light of the express 
bar provided under the proceedings dated 1-7-1998 the 
principle laid down in Jitendra Kumar Singh cannot be 
applied to the case in hand.
10. Having regard to the observations in paras 65 and 
72, in our view, the principles laid down in Jitendra Kumar 
Singh cannot be applied to the case in hand. As rightly 
pointed out by the High Court that the judgment in Jitendra 
13	
(2017) 12 SCC 680
552
Supreme Court Reports
Kumar Singh was based on the statutory interpretation of 
the U.P. Act, 1994 and Government Order dated 25-3-1994 
which provides for entirely a different scheme.”
20.	 Considering similar embargo14 in the recruitment process, another 
Coordinate Bench in Gaurav Pradhan & Ors v. State of Rajasthan & 
Ors15, held general observations in Jitendra Kumar (supra) shall not 
come in aid of reserved candidates who have availed age relaxation 
to migrate to general category. The Bench observed as follows:-
“32. We are of the view that the judgment of this Court 
in Jitendra Kumar Singh which was based on statutory 
scheme and the Circular dated 25-3-1994 has to be 
confined to scheme which was under consideration, 
statutory scheme and intention of the State Government 
as indicated from the said scheme cannot be extended 
to a State where the State circulars are to the contrary 
especially when there is no challenge before us to the 
converse scheme as delineated by the Circular dated 
24-6-2008.”
21.	 These views have been reiterated in Niravkumar Dilipbhai Makwana v. 
Gujarat Public Service Commission & Ors16 and affirmed by a three 
judge Bench in Government (NCT of Delhi) & Ors v. Pradeep Kumar 
& Ors17.
22.	 On the other hand, respondents-writ petitioners have relied on Vikas 
Sankhala & Ors v. Vikas Kumar Agarwal & Ors18, Saurav Yadav & 
Ors v. State of UP & Ors19, Ajithkumar P. & Ors. v. Remin K. R. & 
Ors20 and Sadhana Singh Dangi & Ors v. Pinki Asati & Ors21, to 
sustain the view of the High Court that the migration of the reserved 
candidate who has scored higher than the last selected unreserved 
candidate is permissible. Respondents-writ petitioners argue that a bar 
14	
Para 6.2 of circular dated 24.06.2008
15	
(2018) 11 SCC 352
16	
(2019) 7 SCC 383
17	
(2019) 10 SCC 120
18	
(2017) 1 SCC 350
19	
(2021) 4 SCC 542
20	
(2015) 16 SCC 778
21	
(2022) 12 SCC 401
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
553
Union of India & Ors. v. Sajib Roy
to migration would be in violation of the principles of equality under 
Article 14 and counter to maintenance of efficiency of administration 
enshrined under Article 335 of the Constitution. 
23.	 In Vikas Sankhala (supra), the State government had relaxed the 
minimum pass marks in Teacher Eligibility Test22 by 10 percent to 20 
percent for various reserved categories in the matter of recruitment 
of primary teachers. It was contended such relaxation was contrary 
to the extant reservation policy of the State and migration of such 
candidates who availed concession for recruitment to unreserved 
categories was illegal. Reserved candidates relied on a circular dated 
11.05.2011 which permitted such migration. Holding that the said 
circular was issued after the recruitment process had commenced 
and migration was barred as per earlier circulars, the High Court held 
appointment of reserved candidates availing concession in qualifying 
marks in TET against unreserved seats was impermissible. 
24.	 This Court analysed the concession given to reserved candidates with 
regard to qualifying marks in TET in the context of the recruitment 
rules which inter alia prescribed a uniform addition of 20 percent of 
TET marks to the final score of each candidate. Consequently, the 
reserved candidates who secured lesser marks in TET would not get 
any additional advantage vis-à-vis general candidates in computing 
the final scores irrespective of the lowering of the qualifying marks 
in TET. The Bench clarified this issue as follows:-
“80. …..One of the heads is “marks in TET”. So far as 
this head is concerned, 20% of the marks obtained in 
TET are to be assigned to each candidate. Therefore, 
those reserved category candidates who secured lesser 
marks in TET would naturally get less marks under this 
head. We would like to demonstrate it with an example : 
Suppose a reserved category candidate obtains 53 marks 
in TET, he is treated as having qualified TET. However, 
when he is considered for selection to the post of primary 
teacher, in respect of allocation of marks he will get 20% 
marks for TET. As against him, a general candidate who 
secures 70 marks in TET shall be awarded 14 marks in 
22	
TET for short
554
Supreme Court Reports
recruitment process. Thus, on the basis of TET marks 
reserved category candidate has not got any advantage 
while considering his candidature for the post. On the 
contrary, “level-playing field” is maintained whereby a 
person securing higher marks in TET, whether belonging 
to general category or reserved category, is allocated 
higher marks in respect of 20% of TET marks. Thus, in 
recruitment process no weightage or concession is given 
and allocation of 20% of TET marks is applied across the 
board. Therefore, the High Court is not correct in observing 
that concession was given in the recruitment process on 
the basis of relaxation in TET.”
25.	 In this backdrop, the Bench held irrespective of the applicability of 
circular dated 11.05.2011 relaxation in TET qualifying marks does not 
amount to a concession which would disentitle migration of reserved 
candidates against unreserved seats. The Bench opined:- 
“81. Once this vital differentiation is understood, it would 
lead to the conclusion that no concession becomes 
available to the reserved category candidate by giving 
relaxation in pass marks in TET insofar as recruitment 
process is concerned. It only enables them to compete 
with others by allowing them to participate in the selection 
process. In this backdrop, irrespective of the Circular 
dated 11-5-2011, the reserved category candidates who 
secured more marks than marks obtained by the last 
candidate selected in general category, would be entitled 
to be considered against unreserved category vacancies. 
However, it would be subject to the condition that these 
candidates have not availed any other concession in terms 
of number of attempts, etc., except on fee and age.”
It may also be apposite to note that the earlier circulars applicable 
to the selection process23 did not put a restriction on selection of the 
reserved candidate availing concession in TET marks for appointment 
in unreserved seats provided they scored higher than the last selected 
unreserved candidate.
23	
See Para 73 and 74 in Vikas Sankhala (supra)
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
555
Union of India & Ors. v. Sajib Roy
26.	 In Ajithkumar (supra) the issue which fell for consideration was the 
power of the recruiting authority to conduct a preliminary examination 
in order to shortlist candidates and not the right of a reserved candidate 
seeking relaxation to migrate to unreserved category. 
27.	 In Saurav Yadav (supra) the issue which fell for decision was whether 
women OBC candidates could be adjusted against vacancies in the 
women general category. The case involved an interplay between 
vertical reservation and horizontal reservation for women. Lalit J., 
(as His Lordship then was) permitted the migration holding that the 
candidates in question had not availed of any special benefit which 
may disentitle them from being considered against general category 
seats:-
“42. We must also clarify at this stage that it is not disputed 
that Applicant 1 and other similarly situated candidates are 
otherwise entitled and eligible to be appointed in “Open/
General Category” and that they have not taken or availed 
of any special benefit which may disentitle them from 
being considered against “Open/General Category” seat. 
The entire discussion and analysis in the present case is, 
therefore, from said perspective.”
28.	 Supplementing this view, Ravindra Bhat J. held that:-
“65. ….it is too late in the day for the respondent State 
to contend that women candidates who are entitled to 
benefit of social category reservations, cannot fill open 
category vacancies. The said view is starkly exposed as 
misconceived, because it would result in such women 
candidates with less merit (in the open category) being 
selected, and those with more merit than such selected 
candidates, (in the social/vertical reservation category) 
being left out of selection.”
29.	 However, such observations were premised on the fact that there 
was no rule, or direction which prohibited the adjustment of socially 
reserved categories of women in the general category or open 
category24.
24	
See Para 57 in Saurav Yadav (supra)
556
Supreme Court Reports
30.	 In Sadhana Singh Dangi (supra), the Court again looked into 
migration of women candidates availing horizontal reservation from 
reserved i.e. OBC category to unreserved category. The recruitment 
process permitted migration in vertical reservation but stated that the 
horizontal reservation for women is compartmentalised. Referring to 
the observations of Ravindra Bhat J. in Saurav Yadav (supra) the 
Bench reversed the decision of the High Court barring migration in 
horizontal category, observing as follows:-
“22. It is true that the leading judgment in Saurav Yadav 
[Saurav Yadav v. State of U.P., considered the matter from 
a general plane but the concurring judgment authored by 
S. Ravindra Bhat, J. did additionally consider the issue 
from the perspective of absence of any statutory rules in 
the field. It is also true that in the instant case, there are 
rules occupying the field and the case would be a fortiori, 
but we need not enter into that arena as, in our view, 
the general propositions laid down in Saurav Yadav by 
themselves are sufficient to take care of the controversy 
which has arisen in the instant matters.
23. The law laid down in Saurav Yadav is very clear that 
even while applying horizontal reservation, the merit must 
be given precedence and that if the candidates who belong 
to SCs, STs and OBCs have secured higher marks or are 
more meritorious, they must be considered against the 
seats meant for unreserved candidates.
These observations in Sadhana Singh Dangi (supra) must be read in 
the factual matrix of the case which permitted migration of candidates 
in vertical reservation unlike the present case.
31.	 In Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited & Anr. v. Sandeep Chaudhary 
& Ors25, the cut off marks was reduced for both OBC and general 
candidates and no special concession was given to OBC candidates. 
Under these circumstances, the Court permitted the OBC candidates 
who had scored higher marks than the last selected candidate in 
the general category to avail unreserved seats. 
25	
(2022) 11 SCC 779
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
557
Union of India & Ors. v. Sajib Roy
32.	 On an analysis of the aforecited cases, we summarise as follows:
Whether a reserved candidate who has availed relaxation in fees/
upper age limit to participate in open competition with general 
candidates may be recruited against unreserved seats would depend 
on the facts of each case. That is to say, in the event there is no 
embargo in the recruitment rules/employment notification, such 
reserved candidates who have scored higher than the last selected 
unreserved candidate shall be entitled to migrate and be recruited 
against unreserved seats. However, if an embargo is imposed under 
relevant recruitment rules, such reserved candidates shall not be 
permitted to migrate to general category seats.
33.	 Accordingly, we hold as the respondents-writ petitioners had availed 
concession of age for participating in the recruitment process, in the 
teeth of office memorandum dated 01.07.1998, the High Court was 
wrong in applying the ratio in Jitendra Kumar (supra) and permitting 
them to be considered for appointment in the unreserved category. 
Consequently, we set aside the common impugned judgment and 
order dated 12.10.2018 and order dated 26.02.2019 and allow the 
appeals. Pending application(s) if any, stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain