[2025] 6 S.C.R. 100 : 2025 INSC 619
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan 
v. 
High Court of Madras 
(Criminal Appeal No. 5245 of 2024) 
02 May 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia and Prashant Kumar Mishra,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the charge of criminal contempt is proved against the 
appellants-contemnors beyond all reasonable doubt; whether the 
conviction of the appellants by the High Court for criminal contempt 
of Court and the sentence imposed ought to be upheld.
Headnotes†
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 – ss.15(1) r/w 18(1) – In 
Execution Petition filed by the decree holder, contemnors 
produced interim orders passed by the High Court staying 
the decree  – On verification it was found that the said 
orders were fraudulently created by committing forgery and 
impersonation in the name of the Judge of the High Court – 
High Court held the appellants responsible in preparation of 
the bogus High Court interim orders and held them guilty of 
contempt – Correctness:
Held: When a person is found to have utilised an order of a court 
which he or she knows to be incorrect for conferring benefit on 
persons who are not entitled to the same, the very utilisation of 
the fabricated order by the person concerned would be sufficient 
to hold him/her guilty of contempt, irrespective of the fact whether 
he or she himself or herself is the author of fabrication – High 
Court initiated suo motu contempt on proved and admitted 
facts that Contemnor No.3 produced fake interim orders of the 
High Court and the same were prepared by Contemnor No.4  
and 7 – On facts, it is established beyond all reasonable doubt 
that the appellants-contemnors have either used or created fake 
High Court interim orders – It is not a case of mere probability of 
commission of offence rather it is a proved case of commission 
* Author
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
101
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan v. High Court of Madras
of offence – Creating fake orders of the Court is one of the 
most dreaded acts of contempt of court – It not only thwarts the 
administration of justice, but it has inbuilt intention by committing 
forgery of record  – Charge of contempt proved against the 
appellants beyond all reasonable doubt – Conviction confirmed, 
however, the sentence is modified from simple imprisonment for 
six months to simple imprisonment for one month – Penal Code, 
1860 – ss.466, 468, 471. [Paras 8, 16, 17]
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 – s.20 – Limitation for actions 
for contempt – Originating point for calculating the period of 
limitation, as interpreted in Pallav Sheth’s case – Appellant 
pleaded that the entire contempt proceeding was barred by 
limitation since it should have been initiated within one year 
from date of production of fake interim orders i.e. 18.04.2018 
however, the notice was issued after four years in 2022:
Held: Contempt action must be initiated either by filing of an 
application or by the Court issuing notice suo motu within a period 
of one year from the date on which the contempt is alleged to have 
been committed – The writ petition for initiation of action against 
the appellants was filed by the Decree Holder on 20.08.2018 i.e. 
immediately after four months from 17.04.2018 when the fake orders 
were produced before the Court – On facts, it was on 05.09.2018 
when the contempt proceedings were drawn by the High Court 
though actual notice was issued later on by the Division Bench in 
the year 2022 as the case bundle of writ petition was missing in 
the Registry of the High Court – However, it does not mean that 
the contempt was initiated in the year 2022 – As held in Pallav 
Sheth case, s.20 has to be construed in a manner which would 
avoid such an anomaly and concluded that the date of initiation 
of suo motu contempt action is regarded as the initiation by the 
Court for the purpose of s.20 – Therefore, initiation of contempt 
action shall be treated to have been taken on 05.09.2018 when 
Single Judge dealing with the writ petition so directed and this date 
being within one year from 17.04.2018 when the fake orders were 
presented before the Court, the present contempt action was not 
barred by limitation. [Paras 14, 15]
Contempt of Court – Exercise of power – Object:
Held: The sole object of the Court wielding its power to punish 
for contempt is always for maintaining the purity of administration 
102
Supreme Court Reports
of justice – Nothing is more incumbent upon the courts of justice 
than to preserve their proceedings from being misrepresented, nor 
is there anything more pernicious when the order of the court is 
forged and produced to gain undue advantage. [Para 8]
Case Law Cited
Pallav Sheth v. Custodian & Ors. [2001] Supp. 1 SCR 387 : (2001) 
7 SCC 549 – relied on.
In Re: Bineet Kumar Singh [2001] 3 SCR 424 : (2001) 5 SCC 
501; In Re : Vinay Chandra Mishra [1995] 2 SCR 638 : (1995) 2 
SCC 584; Pritam Pal v. High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur, 
through Registrar [1992] 1 SCR 864 : (1993) Supp. 1 SCC 529; 
Khushi Ram v. Sheo Vati & Anr. (1953) 1 SCC 726 – referred to.
List of Acts
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971; Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Contempt of court; Criminal contempt; Contempt proceedings; 
Suo motu contempt action; Creating fake orders of the Court; 
Fraudulent creation of bogus orders; Creation of forged High Court 
order; Forgery of record; Forgery and impersonation in the name 
of the Judge of the High Court; Fake interim orders of the High 
Court; Charge of contempt proved; Beyond all reasonable doubt; 
Report of the CBCID; Tamil Nadu Forensic Science Laboratory; 
Probability of commission of offence; Contempt proceeding not 
barred by limitation; Utilisation of the fabricated order; Standard 
of strict proof. 
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal No. 
5245 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 22.08.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras in SMCRLCP No. 2493 of 2022
With
Criminal Appeal No. 4219 of 2024 and Criminal Appeal No. 2403 
of 2025
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
103
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan v. High Court of Madras
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Ms. Sonia Mathur, Nachiketa Joshi, S. Nagamuthu, Sr. Advs., 
Tadimalla Bhaskar Gowtham, Ms. Shubhi Bhardwaj, Subhodh 
Patil, Aditya Sharma, Ajay Awasthi, Alabhya Dhamija, Ms. Richa 
Vishwakarma, Ms. Shriya Gilhotra, Ms. Stuti Wason, Purushottam 
Tiwari, M.P. Parthiban, Bilal Mansoor, Shreyas Kaushal, S. Geyolin 
Selvam, Alagiri K, P. V. K. Deivendran, Vairawan A.S.
Advs. for the Respondent:
S Guru Krishnakumar, Sr. Adv., Siddharth Naidu, Ashwin K,  
V. Balachandran, S. Hariharan, K. M. Kalidharun, Vikash Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Prashant Kumar Mishra, J.
Appeal arising out of Criminal Appeal Diary No. 45480 of 2024 is 
admitted.
2.	
The three appellants before us namely, Shanmugam @ 
Lakshminarayanan in Criminal Appeal No. 5245 of 2024 (Contemnor 
No. 4 before the High Court), M. Muruganandam in Criminal Appeal 
No. 4219 of 2024 (Contemnor No. 3 before the High Court) and S. 
Amal Raj in Criminal Appeal arising out of Criminal Appeal Diary 
No. 45480 of 2024 (Contemnor No. 7 before the High Court) stand 
convicted by the High Court for committing contempt of Court and 
have been sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for a period 
of six months. The appellants have called in question the legality and 
validity of the judgment and order of the High Court in the present 
appeals. 
FACTUAL MATRIX
3.	
The District Munsiff Court, Tiruchengode passed a decree dated 
17.11.2004 in O.S. No. 212 of 2000 in favour of J.K.K. Rangammal 
Charitable Trust1 ordering recovery of possession and arrears of 
1	
“Decree Holder”
104
Supreme Court Reports
rent from the Contemnor Nos. 1 to 3. The Contemnors preferred 
appeal suits which were dismissed. The Decree Holder preferred 
Execution Petition and when the Court Amin went to execute 
the decree to effect delivery of possession on 17.04.2018 the 
Contemnor Nos. 1 to 3 produced interim orders passed by the 
High Court of Madras in C.R.P. Nos. 1467 – 1469 of 2018 staying 
the decree. 
3.1.	 The Decree Holder applied and obtained the copies of the 
said orders produced by the Contemnors in Execution Petition 
Nos. 14, 17 and 18 of 2014 and also entered caveat before 
the High Court. On verification, it was found, the said orders 
produced before the Execution Court were fraudulently created 
by committing forgery and impersonation in the name of the 
Judge of the High Court of Madras.
3.2.	 The Decree Holder submitted a complaint to the High Court 
and Superintendent of Police, Namakkal District on 03.05.2018 
and 15.05.2018 respectively. The Registrar General, High 
Court, forwarded the complaint to the Superintendent of Police, 
Namakkal on 18.07.2018. 
The Decree Holder then preferred W.P. No. 22410 of 2018 
before the High Court to direct the Superintendent of Police, 
Namakkal to take action on the complaint dated 15.05.2018. 
In the meanwhile, First Information Report in Crime No. 8 of 
2018 was registered by the District Crime Branch, Namakkal 
for offences under Sections 466, 468 and 471 of the Indian 
Penal Code, 18602 against the Contemnor Nos. 1 to 3/Judgment 
Debtors. The writ petition was disposed of on 05.09.2018 
directing the registry to place the matter before the Division 
Bench, dealing with the criminal contempt matters, after 
obtaining necessary orders from the Hon’ble Chief Justice, 
for the Division Bench to proceed with the matter in terms of 
Section 15 (1) read with Section 18 (1) of the Contempt of 
Courts Act, 1971. The Superintendent of Police, Namakkal 
District, was also directed to monitor the investigation in DCB 
Crime No. 8 of 2018.
2	
‘IPC’
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
105
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan v. High Court of Madras
3.3.	 On 10.09.2018, the Contemnor No. 4/Shanmugam @ 
Lakshminarayanan3 was arrested by the District Crime Branch, 
Namakkal and he made a statement about the manner in which 
the fake order copies were prepared with the help of Contemnor 
No. 6/P. Meiyappan4 in a Digital Net Centre at Bhavani.
3.4.	 On 11.09.2018, Contemnor No. 3/M. Muruganandam5 was 
arrested. He disclosed the manner in which the fraudulent order 
copies were obtained by the Contemnor No. 4 and Contemnor 
No. 7. The District Crime Branch, Namkkal completed the 
investigation and submitted a report on 14.08.2019 in C.C. No. 
537 of 2020 before the Judicial Magistrate, Komarapalayam 
against the Contemnor Nos. 1 to 5.
3.5.	 On account of the case bundle relating to W.P. No. 22410 of 
2018 missing in the Registry, the criminal contempt was not 
numbered from 2018 to 2022. On the Division Bench being 
informed regularly, the bundle was traced, and the contempt 
petition was numbered as 2493 of 2022. Initially, statutory 
notice was issued to the Contemnor Nos. 1 to 5 and thereafter 
to the Contemnor No. 6 and Contemnor No.  7 when they 
were also found to be involved in the process of preparation 
of the fake order of the High Court. Since the Contemnor 
nos. 1 and 2 died during proceedings, the same stood abated 
against them. 
3.6.	 The Division Bench framed charges against Contemnor Nos. 
1, 3, 4 & 5 on 19.12.2022 to the following effect:
“Since S. Sundaram (2nd contemnor) has died, no 
charge could be framed against him.
2. That, you, Angamuthu (1 st contemnor), 
Muruganandam (3rd contemnor), Shanmugam @ 
Lakshminarayanan (4th contemnor) and Thangamani 
(5th contemnor) along with the deceased Sundaram 
submitted the photocopies of the following three 
fake orders of this Court, all dated 12.03.2018 to 
3	
‘C4’
4	
‘C6’
5	
‘C3’
106
Supreme Court Reports
the bailiff, when he came for executing the decree 
as set out above.
i. C.R.P.No.1467 of 2018 and C.M.P.No.2038 of 2018
ii. C.R.P.No.1468 of 2018 and C.M.P.No.2039 of 
2018 and
iii. C.R.P.No.1469 of 2018 and C.M.P.No.2040 of 2018
The above three orders appear to have been passed 
by Hon’ble Mrs. Justice Pushpa Sathyanarayana on 
12.03.2018, whereas, the records of the Registry 
show that no such Civil Revision Petitions were even 
filed, and the said Hon’ble Judge was not holding 
the C.R.P. roster on 12.03.2018 and therefore, it is 
evident that these three orders have been fabricated.”
3.7.	 Basing the affidavits filed by the Contemnor Nos. 1 and 3 to 5, 
during pendency of the contempt proceedings, the High Court 
suo motu impleaded Contemnor Nos. 6 & 7 on the ground 
that the material available on record including the police report 
revealed that these two contemnors are also involved in the 
preparation and handing over of the fake High Court’s orders 
to the litigants, Contemnor Nos. 3 and 5. Accordingly, charges 
were framed by the High Court on 16.04.2024 against the 
Contemnor Nos. 6 & 7 as under: 
“That, you, P. Meiyappan (6th contemnor) and S. 
Amal Raj (7th contemnor) along with Contemnor 
Nos.3 to 5, including the deceased, P. Angamuthu 
and S. Sundaram, created fake orders of this Court, 
all dated 12.03.2018 and aided in producing it to the 
bailiff, when he came for executing the decree as set 
out in the order dated 19.12.2022:
i. C.R.P.No. 1467 of 2018 and C.M.P.No.2038 of 2018 
ii. C.R.P.No.1468 of 2018 and C.M.P.No.2039 of 
2018 and 
iii. C.R.P.No.1469 of 2018 and C.M.P.No.2040 of 2018 
The above three orders appear to have been passed 
by Hon’ble Mrs. Justice Pushpa Sathyanarayana on 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
107
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan v. High Court of Madras
12.03.2018, whereas, the records of the Registry 
show that no such Civil Revision Petitions were even 
filed and the said Hon’ble Judge was not holding 
the C.R.P. roster on 12.03.2018 and therefore, it is 
evident that these three orders have been fabricated.
The above act of yours prima facie attracts Section 
2(c)(iii) of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, which 
is punishable under Section 12, ibid., in that, by 
submitting the aforesaid three photocopies of 
the orders of this Court, you have interfered with 
the administration of justice, in the execution of 
proceedings before the District Munsif, Tiruchengode”
3.8.	 The Contemnor Nos. 3 and 5 preferred Crl. O.P. No. 17492 
of 2023 for reinvestigation/fresh investigation of the crime 
registered against them. The Division Bench passed an order on 
21.09.2023 directing the DGP to form a Special Team whereupon 
the DGP transferred the investigation to CBCID (OCU) and 
renumbered as Crime No. 2 of 2023. A detailed investigation was 
carried out by CBCID, and voluminous incriminating materials 
were collected against the Contemnor Nos. 4 to 6.
3.9.	 P. Meiyappan/Contemnor No. 66 and S. Amal Raj/Contemnor 
No. 7 7 were also arrested by the CBCID. The statement of two 
witnesses namely, Thangaraj and Shanthi was recorded under 
Section 164(5) of Cr. P. C. before the Judicial Magistrate No. II, 
Namakkal. Sample voices of C3 and C4 were also recorded 
by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Namakkal for comparison with 
the cell phone conversation held between them. CBCID filed 
first status report in the contempt petition on 18.10.2023 and 
also verified the record relating to C.R.P. Nos. 1467 – 1469 
of 2018. The material objects were recovered from the Digital 
Net Centre, Bhavani and sent to the Tamil Nadu Forensic 
Science Laboratory.8 The CBCID filed second status report in 
the contempt petition on 19.12.2023 and thereafter third status 
report was filed on 12.02.2024. Basing above status reports, 
C6 & C7 were impleaded.
6	
‘C6’
7	
‘C7’
8	
‘FSL’
108
Supreme Court Reports
3.10.	 In his affidavit in response to the contempt notice, the C3 
admitted that in the Execution case he and other tenants 
were guided by C4 to prefer revision before the High Court. 
According to him, the Judgment Debtor, in three suits, paid 
a sum of Rs. 15,000/- for preferring revision. On the relevant 
date his wife handed over the copy of bogus interim order to 
the Court Amin which was given to him by C4 through one 
Mr. P. Meiyappan. He categorically states that since C4 was 
handling his case for the last two decades, there was no 
occasion to doubt the genuineness of the High Court order. 
When he contacted C4, he stated that one Mr. Thangapandian, 
advocate had given the said order to him. This conversation 
was recorded in the automated Samsung android phone. He 
had given transcript of the conversation between him and C4 
to the police along with the certificate under Section 65-B (4) 
of the Evidence Act, 1872. 
3.11.	 The High Court after considering the materials and the 
submissions made by the appellants found that the three 
appellants are responsible in preparation of the bogus High 
Court interim orders and have accordingly sentenced them to 
undergo simple imprisonment for six months. The High Court 
found that the Contemnor Nos. 1 and 2 are also involved but 
since they have died, the case stood abated against them. 
Insofar as C6 is concerned, the High Court has given him the 
benefit of doubt. 
SUBMISSIONS
4.	
Ms. Sonia Mathur, learned senior counsel and Mr. S. Nagamuthu, 
learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants/contemnors 
would submit that the initiation of contempt against the appellant/
contemnors is barred by limitation in view of the provisions contained 
in Section 20 of Contempt of Court Acts, 1971. It is also argued that 
formal charges are not framed against the appellants/contemnors 
without which contempt cannot proceed. It is vehemently argued that 
standard of proof in a criminal contempt is the same as required in 
a criminal case, therefore, the High Court has erred in holding that 
standard of strict proof is not required for conviction in a contempt 
matter. It is lastly submitted that the High Court having given benefit 
of doubt to C6 and has acquitted Contemnor No. 5, wife of the C3, 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
109
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan v. High Court of Madras
the same yardstick should have been applied against the appellant/
C3 and thus, he deserves to be acquitted. 
5.	
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent/High Court and 
Intervenor/Decree Holder have supported the impugned order. 
According to them, the present appellants have been found involved 
in creation of forged High Court order which have rightly been dealt 
with by the High Court by punishing them for committing contempt of 
Court. It is submitted that when the contempt proceedings are drawn 
suo motu by the High Court the law of limitation is not attracted. 
There being sufficient material against the appellants/contemnors, it 
is not a case where they have been found guilty and sentenced on 
the basis of probabilities, but it is a case of cogent material available 
against them. 
ANALYSIS
6.	
The High Court has recorded the finding of guilt against the appellants/
contemnors on the basis of the report filed by CBCID and the affidavits 
filed by the appellants in response to the statutory notice issued 
against them. The report of the CBCID was in turn founded on the 
statement of witnesses as well as telephonic conversations held 
between C3 and C4 as also between C6 and C4. It has also come 
on record that C4 has forwarded the format for the preparation of 
fake stay order copies received from the advocate Thangapandian 
through P. Meiyappan’s email. Thereafter, C4 prepared the fake stay 
order copies and handed over the same to the accused, Thangamani, 
Sundaram and Angamuthu through P. Meiyappan. C4 further stated 
in his confession statement to the CBCID that Contemnor No. 7/S. 
Amal Raj9 is the person who floated the idea of preparing the forged 
High Court stay orders. The properties were seized from the Digital 
Net Centre, Bhavani where the fake stay orders were prepared 
and the same were sent to the FSL. The High Court has extracted 
the report of the FSL in para 30 of the impugned order. Moreover, 
C3 in his affidavit has alleged that C4 was the person who guided 
them throughout in the litigation and it was he (C4) who handed 
over fake orders through P. Meiyappan. Paragraph Nos. 12, 13, 15 
& 16 of his affidavit have been reproduced by the High Court which 
9	
‘C7’
110
Supreme Court Reports
clearly supports the finding recorded by the High Court. Thus, the 
case against the appellants/C3, C4 & C7 for committing contempt 
has been found proved by the High Court on the basis of cogent 
and reliable material available on record and the same is recorded 
after considering their stand taken in the affidavit.
7.	
Having deeply scrutinised the material, we are satisfied that the finding 
recorded by the High Court does not suffer from any illegality or 
perversity. The present is not a case where it is not known as to who 
produced the fake interim orders of the High Court or who prepared 
the same. The chain of events emerging from 18.04.2018 onwards, 
when the fake orders were presented at the time when the bailiff tried 
to effect delivery of possession, have been found established. As a 
matter of fact, C3 admits that he submitted the fake orders before 
the Court Amin. From the conversation recorded between C3 and C4 
as produced before the CBCID and as mentioned in the affidavits, 
clearly accuses that it was C4 who was responsible for handing over 
the orders through P Meiyappan. It was C7 who floated the idea of 
preparing the forged orders. Thus, all three appellants/contemnors 
have rightly been convicted.
8.	
The sole object of the Court wielding its power to punish for contempt 
is always for maintaining the purity of administration of justice. Nothing 
is more incumbent upon the courts of justice than to preserve their 
proceedings from being misrepresented, nor is there anything more 
pernicious when the order of the court is forged and produced to gain 
undue advantage. A misleading or a wrong statement deliberately and 
wilfully made by a party to the proceedings to obtain a favourable 
order would undoubtedly tantamount to interference with the due 
course of judicial proceedings. When a person is found to have 
utilised an order of a court which he or she knows to be incorrect 
for conferring benefit on persons who are not entitled to the same, 
the very utilisation of the fabricated order by the person concerned 
would be sufficient to hold him/her guilty of contempt, irrespective 
of the fact whether he or she himself or herself is the author of 
fabrication. [See: In Re: Bineet Kumar Singh10). Thus, C3, who 
is the beneficiary of the fake interim orders is rightly held guilty of 
contempt.
10	
(2001) 5 SCC 501
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
111
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan v. High Court of Madras
9.	
In re: “Vinay Chandra Mishra”11, this Court has held that the Judiciary 
is the guardian of the rule of law and the duty to protect the same 
is apart from the function of adjudicating the disputes between the 
parties and it is for this purpose that the courts are entrusted with the 
extraordinary power of punishing those who indulge in acts whether 
inside or outside the courts, which tend to undermine their authority 
and bring them in disrepute and disrespect by scandalising them and 
obstructing them from discharging their duties without fear or favour.
10.	 It has been argued by learned senior counsel for the appellants 
that they were not given proper opportunity to defend, inasmuch 
as, the charges were not framed against them in a formal manner 
nor explained to them. This argument deserves to be rejected at 
the outset in view of the settled proposition in “Vinay Chandra 
Mishra”(supra) in the following words: 
“26.……….The criminal contempt of court undoubtedly 
amounts to an offence but it is an offence sui generis and 
hence for such offence, the procedure adopted both under 
the common law and the statute law even in this country has 
always been summary. However, the fact that the process 
is summary does not mean that the procedural requirement, 
viz., that an opportunity of meeting the charge, is denied 
to the contemner. The degree of precision with which the 
charge may be stated depends upon the circumstances. So 
long as the gist of the specific allegations is made clear or 
otherwise the contemner is aware of the specific allegation, 
it is not always necessary to formulate the charge in a 
specific allegation. The consensus of opinion among the 
judiciary and the jurists alike is that despite the objection 
that the Judge deals with the contempt himself and the 
contemner has little opportunity to defend himself, there is 
a residue of cases where not only it is justifiable to punish 
on the spot, but it is the only realistic way of dealing with 
certain offenders. This procedure does not offend against 
the principle of natural justice, viz., nemo judex in sua 
causa since the prosecution is not aimed at protecting 
the Judge personally but protecting the administration of 
11	
(1995) 2 SCC 584
112
Supreme Court Reports
justice. The threat of immediate punishment is the most 
effective deterrent against misconduct. The Judge has to 
remain in full control of the hearing of the case and he 
must be able to take steps to restore order as early and 
quickly as possible. The time factor is crucial. Dragging 
out the contempt proceedings means a lengthy interruption 
to the main proceedings which paralyses the court for a 
time and indirectly impedes the speed and efficiency with 
which justice is administered. Instant justice can never be 
completely satisfactory, yet it does provide the simplest, 
most effective and least unsatisfactory method of dealing 
with disruptive conduct in court. So long as the contemner’s 
interests are adequately safeguarded by giving him an 
opportunity of being heard in his defence, even summary 
procedure in the case of contempt in the face of the court 
is commended and not faulted.”
11.	 Much emphasis was laid by the appellants taking shelter under 
Section 20 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 197112 to raise the plea 
of limitation. It was submitted that the contempt proceedings should 
have been initiated within one year from the date of production of the 
fake interim orders i.e. 18.04.2018. However, the notice was issued 
after four years in the year 2022 and as such entire proceeding 
is barred by limitation. Reliance is placed on “Pallav Sheth vs. 
Custodian & Ors.”13
12.	 In “Pritam Pal vs. High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur, 
through Registrar”14 the following is held: 
“15. Prior to the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, it was 
held that the High Court has inherent power to deal 
with a contempt of itself summarily and to adopt its own 
procedure, provided that it gives a fair and reasonable 
opportunity to the contemnor to defend himself. But the 
procedure has now been prescribed by Section 15 of the 
Act in exercise of the powers conferred by Entry 14, List 
III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. Though 
12	
“1971 Act”
13	
(2001) 7 SCC 549
14	
(1993) Supp. 1 SCC 529
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
113
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan v. High Court of Madras
the contempt jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the 
High Court can be regulated by legislation by appropriate 
legislature under Entry 77 of List I and Entry 14 of List III 
in exercise of which the Parliament has enacted the Act 
of 1971, the contempt jurisdiction of the Supreme Court 
and the High Court is given a constitutional foundation by 
declaring to be ‘Courts of Record’ under Articles 129 and 
215 of the Constitution and, therefore, the inherent power 
of the Supreme Court and the High Court cannot be taken 
away by any legislation short of constitutional amendment. 
In fact, Section 22 of the Act lays down that the provisions 
of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law relating to contempt of courts. 
It necessarily follows that the constitutional jurisdiction of 
the Supreme Court and the High Court under Articles 129 
and 215 cannot be curtailed by anything in the Act of 1971. 
The above position of law has been well settled by this 
Court in Sukhdev Singh Sodhi v. Chief Justice and Judges 
of the PEPSU High Court [(1953) 2 SCC 571]holding thus:
“In any case, so far as contempt of a High Court itself 
is concerned, as distinct from one of a subordinate 
court, the Constitution vests these rights in every 
High Court, so no Act of a legislature could take 
away that jurisdiction and confer it afresh by virtue 
of its own authority.”
24. From the above judicial pronouncements of this 
Court, it is manifestly clear that the power of the Supreme 
Court and the High Court being the Courts of Record as 
embodied under Articles 129 and 215 respectively cannot 
be restricted and trammelled by any ordinary legislation 
including the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act and 
their inherent power is elastic, unfettered and not subjected 
to any limit. It would be appropriate, in this connection, to 
refer certain English authorities dealing with the power of 
the superior court as Courts of Record.
37. The power under Articles 129 and 215 is a summary 
power as held in the cases of Sukhdev Singh Sodhi, C.K. 
Daphtary and in Hira Lal Dixit v. State of U.P. 
114
Supreme Court Reports
38. Peacock, C.J. laid down the rule quite broadly in the 
following words in Abdool, Re: [(1867) 8 WR Cr 32, 33)
“[T]here can be no doubt that every court of record 
has the power of summarily punishing for contempt.”
42. If we examine the facts of the present case 
in the backdrop of the proposition of law, the 
contentions raised by the appellant challenging the 
procedure followed by the High Court do not merit 
any consideration since the appellant has been served 
with a notice of contempt and thereafter permitted to 
go through the records and finally has been afforded 
a fair opportunity of putting forth his explanation for 
the charge levelled against him. Incidentally, we may 
say that the submission of the contemnor that the 
impugned order is vitiated on the ground of procedural 
irregularities and that Article 215 of the Constitution of 
India is to be read in conjunction with the provisions 
of Sections 15 and 17 of the Act of 1971, cannot be 
countenanced and it has to be summarily rejected as 
being devoid of any merit.”
(Emphasis supplied)
13.	 A three Judge Bench of this Court in “Pallav Sheth” (supra) has 
held thus: 
“30. There can be no doubt that both this Court and High 
Courts are courts of record, and the Constitution has given 
them the powers to punish for contempt. The decisions 
of this Court clearly show that this power cannot be 
abrogated or stultified. But if the power under Article 129 
and Article 215 is absolute, can thereby any legislation 
indicating the manner and to the extent that the power 
can be exercised? If there is any provision of the law 
which stultifies or abrogates the power under Article 129 
and/or Article 215, there can be little doubt that such law 
would not be regarded as having been validly enacted. 
It, however, appears to us that providing for the quantum 
of punishment or what may or may not be regarded 
as acts of contempt or even providing for a period of 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
115
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan v. High Court of Madras
limitation for initiating proceedings for contempt cannot 
be taken to be a provision which abrogates or stultifies 
the contempt jurisdiction under Article 129 or Article 215 
of the Constitution.
33. The question which squarely arises is as to what is the 
meaning to be given to the expression “no court shall initiate 
any proceedings for contempt …” occurring in Section 20 
of the 1971 Act. Section 20 deals not only with criminal 
contempt but also with civil contempt. It applies not only 
to the contempt committed in the face of the High Court 
or the Supreme Court but would also be applicable in the 
case of contempt of the subordinate court. The procedure 
which is to be followed in each of these cases is different.
41. One of the principles underlying the law of limitation 
is that a litigant must act diligently and not sleep over its 
rights. In this background such an interpretation should 
be placed on Section 20 of the Act which does not lead 
to an anomalous result causing hardship to the party who 
may have acted with utmost diligence and because of the 
inaction on the part of the court, a contemner cannot be 
made to suffer. Interpreting the section in the manner 
canvassed by Mr Venugopal would mean that the court 
would be rendered powerless to punish even though 
it may be fully convinced of the blatant nature of the 
contempt having been committed and the same having 
been brought to the notice of the court soon after the 
committal of the contempt and within the period of 
one year of the same. Section 20, therefore, has to 
be construed in a manner which would avoid such an 
anomaly and hardship both as regards the litigants 
as also by placing a pointless fetter on the part of the 
court to punish for its contempt. An interpretation of 
Section 20, like the one canvassed by the appellant, 
which would render the constitutional power of the 
courts nugatory in taking action for contempt even 
in cases of gross contempt, successfully hidden 
for a period of one year by practising fraud by the 
contemner would render Section 20 as liable to be 
regarded as being in conflict with Article 129 and/or 
116
Supreme Court Reports
Article 215. Such a rigid interpretation must therefore 
be avoided.
(Emphasis supplied)
42. The decision in Om Prakash Jaiswal case to the effect 
that initiation of proceedings under Section 20 can only be 
said to have occurred when the court formed the prima 
facie opinion that contempt has been committed and issued 
notice to the contemner to show cause why it should not be 
punished, is taking too narrow a view of Section 20 which 
does not seem to be warranted and is not only going to 
cause hardship but would perpetrate injustice. A provision 
like Section 20 has to be interpreted having regard to 
the realities of the situation. (Emphasis supplied) For 
instance, in a case where a contempt of a subordinate 
court is committed, a report is prepared whether on an 
application to court or otherwise, and reference made by 
the subordinate court to the High Court. It is only thereafter 
that a High Court can take further action under Section 
15. In the process, more often than not, a period of one 
year elapses. If the interpretation of Section 20 put in 
Om Prakash Jaiswal case is correct, it would mean that 
notwithstanding both the subordinate court and the High 
Court being prima facie satisfied that contempt has been 
committed the High Court would become powerless to 
take any action. On the other hand, if the filing of an 
application before the subordinate court or the High 
Court, making of a reference by a subordinate court on 
its own motion or the filing of an application before an 
Advocate-General for permission to initiate contempt 
proceedings is regarded as initiation by the court for 
the purposes of Section 20, then such an interpretation 
would not impinge on or stultify the power of the High 
Court to punish for contempt which power, dehors 
the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 is enshrined in 
Article 215 of the Constitution. Such an interpretation 
of Section 20 would harmonise that section with the 
powers of the courts to punish for contempt which is 
recognised by the Constitution.
(Emphasis supplied)
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
117
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan v. High Court of Madras
44. Action for contempt is divisible into two categories, 
namely, that initiated suo motu by the court and that 
instituted otherwise than on the court’s own motion. The 
mode of initiation in each case would necessarily be 
different. While in the case of suo motu proceedings, it 
is the court itself which must initiate by issuing a notice, 
in the other cases initiation can only be by a party filing 
an application. In our opinion, therefore, the proper 
construction to be placed on Section 20 must be 
that action must be initiated, either by filing of an 
application or by the court issuing notice suo motu, 
within a period of one year from the date on which the 
contempt is alleged to have been committed.
(Emphasis supplied)
46. The record discloses that the Custodian received 
information of the appellant having committed contempt 
by taking over benami concerns, transferring funds to 
these concerns and operating their accounts clandestinely 
only from a letter dated 5-5-1998 from the Income Tax 
Authorities. It is soon thereafter that on 18-6-1998, a petition 
was filed for initiating action in contempt and notice issued 
by the Special Court on 9-4-1999. Section 29(2) of the 
Limitation Act, 1963 provides that where any special or 
local law prescribes for any suit, appeal or application a 
period of limitation different from the period prescribed by 
the Schedule, the provisions of Section 3 shall apply as if 
such period were the period prescribed by the Schedule 
and for the purpose of determining any period of limitation 
prescribed for any suit, appeal or application by any special 
or local law, the provisions contained in Sections 4 to 
24 (inclusive) shall apply insofar as, and to the extent to 
which, they are not expressly excluded by such special or 
local law. This Court in the case of Kartick Chandra Das 
has held that by virtue of Section 29(2) read with Section 
3 of the Limitation Act, limitation stands prescribed as a 
special law under Section 19 of the Contempt of Courts 
Act, 1971 and in consequence thereof the provisions of 
Sections 4 to 24 of the Limitation Act stand attracted.
118
Supreme Court Reports
47. Section 17 of the Limitation Act, inter alia, provides that 
where, in the case of any suit or application for which a 
period of limitation is prescribed by the Act, the knowledge 
of the right or title on which a suit or application is founded 
is concealed by the fraud of the defendant or his agent 
[Section 17(1)(b)] or where any document necessary to 
establish the right of the plaintiff or the applicant has been 
fraudulently concealed from him [Section 17(1)(d)], the 
period of limitation shall not begin to run until the plaintiff 
or the applicant has discovered the fraud or the mistake or 
could, with reasonable diligence, have discovered it; or in 
the case of a concealed document, until the plaintiff or the 
applicant first had the means of producing the concealed 
document or compelling its production. These provisions 
embody fundamental principles of justice and equity viz. 
that a party should not be penalised for failing to adopt 
legal proceedings when the facts or material necessary 
for him to do so have been wilfully concealed from him 
and also that a party who has acted fraudulently should 
not gain the benefit of limitation running in his favour by 
virtue of such fraud.
48. The provisions of Section 17 of the Limitation Act are 
applicable in the present case. The fraud perpetuated 
by the appellant was unearthed only on the Custodian 
receiving information from the Income Tax Department, 
vide their letter of 5-5-1998. On becoming aware 
of the fraud, application for initiating contempt 
proceedings was filed on 18-6-1998, well within the 
period of limitation prescribed by Section 20. It is on 
this application that the Special Court by its order of 
9-4-1999 directed the application to be treated as a 
show-cause notice to the appellant to punish him for 
contempt. (Emphasis supplied) In view of the abovestated 
facts and in the light of the discussion regarding the correct 
interpretation of Section 20 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 
it follows that the action taken by the Special Court to 
punish the appellant for contempt was valid. The Special 
Court has only faulted in being unduly lenient in awarding 
the sentence. We do not think it is necessary, under the 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
119
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan v. High Court of Madras
circumstances, to examine the finding of the Special Court 
that this was a continuing wrong or contempt and, therefore, 
action for contempt was not barred by Section 20.”
14.	 While the appellants have referred to para 44 of “Pallav Sheth”(supra), 
the respondent has relied upon paragraph nos. 30, 41 & 42. Upon 
reading of the entire judgment in the matter of “Pallav Sheth” (supra), 
it is clearly depicted that the contempt action must be initiated either 
by filing of an application or by the Court issuing notice suo motu 
within a period of one year from the date on which the contempt is 
alleged to have been committed. The originating point for calculating 
the period of limitation has been interpreted in para 42 of Pallav 
Sheth which is reproduced again at the cost of repetition. 
“42………………..On the other hand, if the filing of an 
application before the subordinate court or the High Court, 
making of a reference by a subordinate court on its own 
motion or the filing of an application before an Advocate-
General for permission to initiate contempt proceedings 
is regarded as initiation by the court for the purposes of 
Section 20, then such an interpretation would not impinge 
on or stultify the power of the High Court to punish for 
contempt which power, dehors the Contempt of Courts 
Act, 1971 is enshrined in Article 215 of the Constitution. 
Such an interpretation of Section 20 would harmonise 
that section with the powers of the courts to punish for 
contempt which is recognised by the Constitution.”
Thus, in view of the law laid down by this Court in paras 42 and 44 
of “Pallav Sheth” (supra), it is to be seen as to when the application 
was preferred by the respondent/Decree Holder for initiation of action 
against the appellants. The present contempt proceeding has its 
root in WP No. 22410 of 2018 preferred by the Trust/Decree Holder. 
This writ petition was preferred on 20.08.2018 i.e. immediately after 
four months from 17.04.2018 when the fake orders were produced 
before the Court Amin. In this writ petition, prayer was made to 
initiate action against the respondents for committing act of forgery 
and fraudulent creation of bogus orders in the name of the High 
Court. When the matter was posted before the learned Single 
Judge it was informed by the Registry that the matter was placed 
before the Hon’ble Chief Justice on the administrative side and the 
120
Supreme Court Reports
Hon’ble Chief Justice has directed police investigation in this case. 
Accordingly, the Deputy Registrar, High Court of Madras gave a 
complaint to the Superintendent of Police, Namakkal Division for 
investigation and eventually Crime No. 8 of 2018 was registered in 
District Crime Branch, Namakkal Division on 04.09.2018. When the 
matter was placed before the learned Single Judge on 05.09.2018, 
the Court was of the prima facie opinion that despite registration 
of FIR further action needs to be taken for initiation of contempt 
proceedings under the Act, 1971, as there is prima facie material to 
show that criminal contempt has been committed. The jurisdiction 
to proceed for criminal contempt being with the Division Bench, 
the learned Single Judge of the High Court directed the Registry to 
place the matter before the Division Bench dealing with the criminal 
contempt matters, after obtaining necessary orders from Hon’ble 
the Chief Justice, for the Division Bench to proceed with the matter 
in terms of Section 15(1) read with Section 18(1) of the Act, 1971. 
Thus, it is this date i.e. 05.09.2018 when the contempt proceedings 
were drawn by the High Court though actual notice was issued later 
on by the Division Bench in the year 2022. Significantly, it requires 
special reference that for about 4 years the case bundle of WP No. 
22410 of 2018 was missing in the Registry of the High Court. On 
repeated information/request by the Decree Holder the bundle was 
traced, and the contempt case was registered in 2022. However, 
it does not mean that the contempt was initiated in the year 2022. 
15.	 It is significant to notice that the case bundle of writ petition in the 
High Court was misplaced in the registry of the High Court so as to 
render the High Court powerless to punish for contempt even though 
it may be fully convinced of the blatant nature of the contempt and 
the same having been brought to the notice of the Court within 
one year from the date of commission of contempt. Such situation 
was clearly foresighted by this Court in “Pallav Sheth”(supra), by 
observing in para 41 that Section 20 of the Act, 1971, therefore, has 
to be construed in a manner which would avoid such an anomaly and 
eventually concluded that the date of initiation of suo motu contempt 
action is regarded as the initiation by the Court for the purpose of 
Section 20. Therefore, in the case in hand, initiation of contempt 
action shall be treated to have been taken on 05.09.2018 when the 
learned Single Judge dealing with the writ petition so directed and 
this date being within one year from 17.04.2018 when the fake orders 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
121
Shanmugam @ Lakshminarayanan v. High Court of Madras
were presented before the Court Amin, we are of the considered 
view that the present contempt action was not barred by limitation. 
16.	 Another submission of learned senior counsel for the appellants 
is that the High Court has proceeded on an assumption that the 
standard of strict proof required to convict a person under the penal 
law need not be considered whereas in Khushi Ram vs. Sheo Vati 
& Anr.,15 it is held that the charge of contempt of court partakes of 
the nature of a criminal charge and it must be established beyond 
all reasonable doubt. Basing above, it is argued that the charge 
having not proved beyond all reasonable doubt, the appellants 
cannot be punished. However, the present is a case where the 
High Court has initiated suo motu contempt on proved and admitted 
facts that C3 produced fake interim orders of the High Court and 
the same were prepared by C4 & C7. Despite observation by the 
High Court, we are of the view that present is a case where it is 
established beyond all reasonable doubt that the present appellants/
contemnors have either used or created fake High Court interim 
orders. It is not a case of mere probability of commission of offence 
rather it is a proved case of commission of offence. Creating fake 
orders of the Court is one of the most dreaded acts of contempt 
of court. It not only thwarts the administration of justice, but it has 
inbuilt intention by committing forgery of record. Therefore, the 
charge of contempt is fully proved against the appellants beyond 
all reasonable doubt. 
17.	 For the foregoing, we have no hesitation in affirming the finding of 
guilt of commission of contempt by the appellants, as recorded by 
the High Court. The appeals are, accordingly, dismissed. 
However, insofar as imposition of sentence of simple imprisonment 
for six months is concerned, the same appears to be harsh, therefore, 
considering the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of 
the view that ends of justice would be served if the appellants are 
sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for one month.
Accordingly, we confirm the conviction and modify the sentence from 
simple imprisonment for six months to simple imprisonment for one 
month. It is ordered accordingly.
15	
(1953) 1 SCC 726
122
Supreme Court Reports
The appellants shall surrender before the Registrar of the High 
Court of Madras within 15 days from today to undergo the sentence. 
Registrar (Judicial) of this Court is directed to communicate this order 
to the concerned High Court for compliance.
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey