[2025] 2 S.C.R. 612 : 2025 INSC 178
Hansraj 
v. 
State of Chhattisgarh
(Criminal Appeal No. 1387 of 2012)
10 February 2025
[Pankaj Mithal* and Ahsanuddin Amanullah, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The appellant was convicted for offence u/s.302 IPC. Whether the 
appellant can be held guilty of the commission of offence beyond 
reasonable doubt.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – s.302 – Appellant was residing with the 
victim-deceased and was assisting him in his work – On the 
fateful day, the appellant left in morning however, returned 
early claiming his cycle got punctured – He asked PW-5 
(wife of victim) for money to get puncture repaired – To give 
appellant money PW-5 went to market to sell paddy, leaving 
appellant and her victim-husband behind – When she returned, 
she saw her husband lying on floor dead, bleeding with his 
neck severed – FIR was registered – Trial Court convicted 
appellant for offence u/s.302 IPC and same was upheld by 
the High Court – Correctness:
Held: It is settled that the chain of events leading to the prosecution 
of the convict must conclusively be established with certainty and 
there shall not be any room for any second opinion which may 
lead to the innocence of the accused – In the instant case, it is 
alleged that there was some discord between appellant and the 
deceased in connection with non-payment/untimely payment of 
wages – The issue of non-payment of wages is hardly material 
and is so trivial a matter so as to compel anyone to take an 
extreme step of committing a crime of such a grave nature – 
Moreover, there is no material evidence to prove any discord 
between the two – It is the consistent case of all the witnesses 
including PW-5 that the appellant had left in the morning for his 
* Author
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
613
Hansraj v. State of Chhattisgarh
native place and that as told by PW-5 he returned as his cycle’s 
tyre got punctured – The fact that he actually returned as alleged 
does not stand established by any independent evidence except 
for the statement of PW-5 – However, her statement could not be 
corroborated by any piece of evidence – The cycle of the appellant 
was recovered by the police but no effort was made to find out 
if either of the tyres was actually punctured, which could have 
proved that the appellant may have returned as the cycle’s tyre 
got punctured – The weapon of crime i.e., farsi (Ex P/6) with blood 
stains was set to have been recovered after 20-25 days of the 
incident on the pointing out of the appellant – However, no forensic 
report was brought on record to prove that the blood stains on it 
matched with that of the blood of the deceased – Merely for the 
reason that the doctor opined that the injuries on the deceased 
may have been caused by a similar weapon would not conclude 
that the recovered farsi was the weapon of crime – That apart, 
JR, who lodged the complaint, in his cross-examination stated 
that the farsi was lying in an open place, referring to the place 
of the commission of the crime – The said statement completely 
belies the fact that the farsi was recovered subsequently from 
the field of one C – The recovery of the weapon of crime or 
the farsi, which was recovered, is doubtful and it is also not 
certain that it was actually the weapon of crime – Also, PW-5 
had not found and seen the appellant at the place of the crime 
after her return as he had already fled – However, in her cross 
examination she took a summersault and stated that when she 
came back, she saw the appellant running from the house with 
the farsi – Further, the evidence of none of the two witnesses 
(PW-1 and PW-3) could conclusively establish that they saw 
the appellant running or fleeing from the place of crime or from 
the village – The identity of the person running away had not 
been established by any evidence – The circumstances raising 
finger upon the appellant, are not of a conclusive nature to prove 
beyond the shadow of doubt that the appellant was the person 
responsible for the commission of the crime – Thus, in the facts 
and circumstances of the case, the benefit of doubt goes in his 
favour. [Paras 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17]
Case Law Cited
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra [1985] 1  
SCR 88 : (1984) 4 SCC 116 – referred to.
614
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Section 302 of Penal Code, 1860; Circumstantial evidence; 
Conclusion of guilt; Hypothesis of guilt; Chain of evidence; 
Innocence of accused; Motive; Last seen theory; Recovery of 
weapon of crime; Benefit of doubt.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1387 of 2012
From the Judgment and Order dated 30.07.2010 of the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in CRLA No. 291 of 2003
Appearances for Parties
Ms. Rukhsana Choudhury, Adv. for the Appellant.
Vikrant Bais, A.A.G., Abhishek Pandey, Prashant Kumar Umrao, 
Advs. for the Respondent.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.	
The appellant Hansraj is a convict for offence under Section 302 IPC1 
for murdering Ramlal of village Ghotha Sakulpara Bhanupratappur, 
District Kanker, Chhattisgarh and has been awarded life imprisonment 
and fine of Rs.1000/-. 
2.	
The order of conviction and sentence of the Trial Court dated 
19.12.2002 has been confirmed by the High Court in appeal by the 
impugned judgment and order dated 30.07.2010. 
3.	
The appellant preferred the Special Leave Petition with delay of 653 
days which was condoned and leave to appeal was granted. Since 
the appellant had remained in jail for over 10 years, he was directed 
to be released on bail by this Court. 
1	
Indian Penal Code
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
615
Hansraj v. State of Chhattisgarh
4.	
The case of the prosecution is based only on circumstantial evidence 
and there is no eyewitness to the incident. 
5.	
The argument of the learned counsel for the appellant is that it is 
a completely false case and that even the circumstances have not 
been proved conclusively to hold the appellant guilty and there are 
stark contradictions in the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses. 
6.	
The incident is of 28.03.2002. It is alleged that the appellant was 
residing with the deceased and was assisting him in his work for 
the last over two months. On the fateful day the appellant at 7:00 
am in the morning left for his native place on cycle with a bag but is 
set to have returned at around 9:00 am claiming that his cycle got 
punctured. He therefore asked for money from Budhiyarin Bai (PW-5) 
the wife of the deceased, to get the puncture repaired. Budhiyarin 
Bai told him that she had no money readily available at home and 
that he can take paddy and sell it in the market, but he refused. So, 
Budhiyarin Bai herself went to the market to sell the paddy, leaving 
the appellant and her husband at home. When she returned at 
about 9:30 am, she saw the appellant fleeing with a farsi (Ex P/6) 
in his hand and discovered that her husband is lying on the floor, 
profusely bleeding with his neck severed. She therefore raised an 
alarm and upon hearing her cries her neighbours Jogeshwar (PW-3) 
and Jhadu Ram (PW-4) came and they also saw her husband lying 
dead. The neighbours informed another villager namely Jogi Ram 
(PW-1) who also came on the spot and thereafter proceeded to the 
Police Station Bhanupratappur to lodge an FIR. He lodged the FIR 
at 11:15 am on the same day. 
7.	
It is alleged that the relationship of the appellant with the deceased 
was strained probably on account of non-payment/untimely payment 
of his wages. The appellant was the person last seen in the company 
of the deceased and that the weapon of recovery i.e., farsi was 
recovered at his pointing out. The injuries sustained by the deceased 
were opined to have been caused by the weapon recovered. In 
these circumstances, the prosecution asserts that the evidence on 
record proves beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant alone is 
the person who committed the offence and that he has been rightly 
convicted and sentenced by the two Courts below.
8.	
Undisputedly, the case of the prosecution is based on circumstantial 
evidence and there is no eyewitness to the commission of the offence 
in as much as the wife of the deceased, Budhiyarin Bai, was also 
not present at the time of the commission of the offence and had 
616
discovered that her husband was lying on the floor bleeding profusely 
with neck severed upon returning from the market. She probably 
saw the accused fleeing from the scene of crime. 
9.	
The law with regard to a case based purely on circumstantial 
evidence stands crystalised by the decision of this Court in the case 
of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda vs State of Maharashtra2 wherein 
five golden principles known as panchsheel proof of a case based on 
circumstantial evidence were enshrined namely (i) the circumstances 
from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully 
established crafting out a distinction between ‘may be’ established 
and ‘must or should’ be established; (ii) the facts established should 
be consistent with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused; (iii) the 
circumstances should be of a conclusive nature; (iv) the circumstance 
should exclude every other possible hypothesis except the one to be 
proved i.e., the guilt of the accused; and (v) there must be a chain 
of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for 
conclusion that the accused is innocent and must show that in all 
human probability the act must have been done by the accused.
10.	 In other words, the chain of events leading to the prosecution of the 
convict must conclusively be established with certainty and there 
shall not be any room for any second opinion which may lead to the 
innocence of the accused.
11.	 The appellant is said to have a motive to kill the deceased. The 
alleged motive being that he was living as a servant of the deceased 
for the last two months and there was some discord between him 
and the deceased in connection with non-payment/untimely payment 
of wages. However, such a discord is not of such a nature of extent 
which may lead to such a drastic action on part of the appellant to kill 
the deceased. The issue of non-payment of wages is hardly material 
and is so trivial a matter so as to compel anyone to take an extreme 
step of committing a crime of such a grave nature. Moreover, there 
is no material evidence to prove any discord between the two. 
12.	 In so far as the last seen theory is concerned, that the appellant was 
in the company of the deceased at the time when Budhiyarin Bai 
(PW-5) the wife of the deceased went to the market to sell paddy 
also appears to be a little doubtful. It is the consistent case of all 
the witnesses including Budhiyarin Bai (PW-5) that the appellant 
had left in the morning at about 7:00 am for his native place and 
2	
(1984) 4 SCC 116
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
617
Hansraj v. State of Chhattisgarh
that as told by Budhiyarin Bai (PW-5) he returned around 9:00 am 
as his cycle’s tyre got punctured. The fact that he actually returned 
as alleged does not stand established by any independent evidence 
except for the statement of Budhiyarin Bai (PW-5). However, her 
statement could not be corroborated by any piece of evidence. It is 
hardly believable that a person whose relationship with the deceased 
was not cordial and has left for his native place in disgust would 
return soon thereafter. The cycle of the appellant was recovered by 
the police but no effort was made to find out if either of the tyres 
was actually punctured, which could have proved that the appellant 
may have returned as the cycle’s tyre got punctured. 
13.	 The weapon of crime i.e., farsi (Ex P/6) was set to have been 
recovered after 20-25 days of the incident on the pointing out of the 
appellant. It has come in evidence that it had some blood stains. 
However, no forensic report was brought on record to prove that the 
blood stains on it matched with that of the blood of the deceased. 
Merely for the reason that the doctor opined that the injuries on the 
deceased may have been caused by a similar weapon would not 
conclude that the recovered farsi was the weapon of crime. Similar 
and identical instruments like farsi are found in almost every home 
in the village as it is one of the most used farming equipment. That 
apart, Jogi Ram, who lodged the complaint, in his cross examination 
stated that the farsi was lying in an open place, referring to the place 
of the commission of the crime. The said statement completely belies 
the fact that the farsi was recovered subsequently from the field of 
one Chamaru Ram. The recovery of the weapon of crime or the 
farsi, which was recovered, is doubtful and it is also not certain that 
it was actually the weapon of crime. 
14.	 One important circumstance pointing to the involvement of the 
appellant is that he was seen running from the village both by 
Budhiyarin Bai (PW-5) and Jogi Ram (PW-1). Budhiyarin Bai in her 
statement in unequivocal terms stated that when she returned home 
after selling the paddy, the appellant had fled. It means that she had 
not found and seen the appellant at the place of the crime after her 
return as he had already fled. However, in her cross examination she 
took a summersault and stated that when she came back, she saw the 
appellant Hans Raj running from the house with the farsi. Jogi Ram 
(PW-1) who at the time of occurrence of the incident was working in 
his field, stated that he had seen the appellant running before he came 
to know about the incident through Jogeshwar (PW-3), whereupon 
he went to the house of the deceased. In his cross examination, 
618
he further stated that the wife of the deceased, Budhiyarin Bai, told 
him that when she came back after selling paddy, her husband was 
lying on the spot and the appellant had disappeared. PW-1 nowhere 
stated that Budhiyarin Bai saw the appellant fleeing from the spot 
rather, she only informed that the appellant had already disappeared 
when she returned from the market. Later, in the cross-examination, 
Jogi Ram stated that while working in the field collecting mahuva 
he only saw a man running from a distance of more than a furlong. 
But he never named the person who was running. Therefore, the 
evidence of none of the two witnesses could conclusively establish 
that they saw the appellant running or fleeing from the place of crime 
or from the village. The identity of the person running away had not 
been established by any evidence. 
15.	 In addition to this, according to the prosecution, the clothes of the 
appellant which he was wearing at the time of the incident were 
produced by one Pritam Singh (PW-9) who was declared to be 
hostile. The said clothes again had the blood stains but no forensic 
report was produced to prove that the blood of those stains matched 
with the blood of the deceased.
16.	 In the aforesaid facts, the circumstances raising finger upon the 
appellant, are not of a conclusive nature to prove beyond the 
shadow of doubt that the appellant was the person responsible for 
the commission of the crime. The possibility of innocence of the 
appellant does not stand excluded as per the chain of events.
17.	 Thus, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the appellant cannot 
be held guilty of the commission of the offence beyond reasonable 
doubt and therefore, in such circumstances the benefit of doubt goes 
in his favour. Accordingly, we are of the opinion that the Courts below 
have manifestly erred in convicting him for the aforesaid offence.
18.	 The impugned judgment and orders dated 19.12.2002 and 30.07.2010 
are hereby set aside and the appellant is acquitted from the offence 
charged with. He has already suffered incarceration for over 10 years. 
He is already on bail. His sureties and bail bonds are discharged. 
19.	 The appeal is allowed accordingly.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan