[2025] 1 S.C.R. 230 : 2025 INSC 31
Jit Vinayak Arolkar 
v. 
State of Goa & Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 393 of 2024)
06 January 2025
[Abhay S. Oka* and Ujjal Bhuyan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
By the impugned judgment, the High Court has dismissed a writ 
petition filed by the appellant for quashing a First Information 
Report registered at the instance of the 4th respondent for the 
offence punishable under Section 420 of the Penal Code, 1860. 
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – s.420 – On 16.10.2018, the 4th respondent 
filed twelve separate civil suits, claiming a declaration of his 
ownership in respect of the subject property – On 23.10.2020, 
the 4th respondent, through his constituted attorney, filed a 
complaint with the Police, alleging that the appellant had sold 
a portion of the subject property without the consent of all the 
legal heirs of both co-owners – Based on the said complaint, 
the impugned FIR was registered by the police – Appellant 
sought quashing of FIR:
Held: Appellant stated that the appellant is the constituted 
attorney of VN and SN, the vendors under the sale deeds subject 
matter of the impugned FIR – It is pertinent to note that the 
constituted attorney of the 4th respondent has omitted to mention 
in the complaint that two years before the filing of the complaint, 
declaratory suits were filed by the 4th respondent, which were 
pending – Interestingly, two years after the registration of the FIR, 
on 13.10.2022, the 4th respondent filed a supplementary complaint 
with the police alleging that even the said VN and SN had also 
committed an offence – The grievance of the 4th respondent is that 
the vendors under the sale deeds had only an undivided share 
in the subject property, and they could not have sold the entire 
subject property under the sale deeds – The contention of the 
* Author
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
231
Jit Vinayak Arolkar v. State of Goa & Ors.
appellant is that what is sold is the right, title and interest of VN 
and SN – Thus, the dispute between the parties is predominantly 
a civil dispute – In the instant case, it is impossible to understand 
how the appellant deceived the 4th respondent and how the act 
of execution of sale deeds by the appellant caused or was likely 
to cause damage or harm to the 4th respondent in body, mind, 
reputation or property – The appellant has not purported to 
execute the sale deeds on behalf of the 4th respondent – He has 
not purported to transfer the rights of the 4th respondent – There 
is no allegation that the appellant deceived the 4th respondent to 
transfer or deliver the subject property – Taking the complaint as 
correct, the offence of cheating under Section 415 of IPC was 
not made out against the appellant – Moreover, the complaint 
was filed by the 4th respondent for the first time after a time gap 
of two years from the date of institution of the civil suits – In the 
complaint, he suppressed the fact that civil suits were already filed 
in which applications for temporary injunction were made – When 
there was a dispute over the title, the act of the 4th respondent of 
setting in motion criminal law two years after the date of filing of 
the suits amounts to nothing but abuse of the process of law – 
Thus, the impugned judgment is set aside – Also, the FIR and the  
proceedings based thereon are quashed and set aside only as 
against the appellant. [Paras 9, 10, 12.1, 13, 14]
Case Law Cited
Mohd. Ibrahim v. State of Bihar [2009] 13 SCR 1254 : (2009) 8 
SCC 751 – relied on.
Vijayasarathy and Anr. v. Sudha Seetharam and Anr. [2019] 2 
SCR 185 : (2019) 16 SCC 739; M/s Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. 
Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra and Ors. [2021] 4 SCR 1044 : (2021) 
19 SCC 401; Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander and Anr. [2012] 7 
SCR 988 : (2012) 9 SCC 460 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Section 415 of IPC; Section 420 of IPC; Purchasers; Sale deeds; 
False representation; Ownership; Transfer of rights; Offence of 
cheating.
232
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 393 
of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 01.03.2023 of the High court 
of Judicature at Bombay at Goa in CRLWP No. 55 of 2022
Appearances for Parties
Huzefa Ahmadi, Sr. Adv., Ninad Laud, Abhijit Gosavi, Sunil Shetye, 
Athnain Naik, Dcosta Ivo Manuel Simon, Advs. for the Appellant.
Devadatt Kamat, Sr. Adv., Abhay Anil Anturkar, Dhruv Tank, 
Aniruddha Awalgaonkar, Ms. Surbhi Kapoor, Rajesh Gulab Inamdar, 
Siddhant Kumar Singh, Arsalan Mohd, Advs. for the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Abhay S. Oka, J.
FACTUAL ASPECT
1.	
By the impugned judgment, the High Court has dismissed a writ 
petition filed by the appellant for quashing a First Information Report 
(for short, the ‘impugned FIR’) registered at the instance of the 4th 
respondent for the offence punishable under Section 420 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, ‘IPC’).
2.	
The dispute pertains to the property known as “CAPNIVORIL 
GUERA”, “CAPNIVORIL MOLLY” or “KAPNI VARIL GHERA” situated 
in Dhargalim Village, Pernem, Goa, which is described in the Land 
Registration Office of Bardez under No. 63 at pages 11V of book 
overleaf of B-1(new) bearing Sy No. 481/0 (for short, ‘the subject 
property’). 
3.	
On 16th October 2018, the 4th respondent filed twelve separate civil 
suits in the civil court in Goa, claiming a declaration of his ownership in 
respect of the subject property. In the suits filed by the 4th respondent, 
it was contended that the subject property is a common and undivided 
property in which the 4th respondent has an undivided share, which 
he inherited from his father. The appellant filed a written statement 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
233
Jit Vinayak Arolkar v. State of Goa & Ors.
in the suit on 1st September 2020 and claimed that the property 
was originally owned by one Sacarama Sadassiva Natecar. On 23rd 
October 2020, the 4th respondent, through his constituted attorney, 
filed a complaint with the Superintendent of Police, North Goa District, 
alleging that the appellant had sold a portion of the subject property 
without the consent of all the legal heirs of both co-owners. Based on 
the said complaint, the impugned FIR was registered by the police. 
The appellant was granted anticipatory bail by the sessions court vide 
order dated 10th February 2021 in connection with the impugned FIR. 
On 23rd October 2021, the appellant filed a writ petition before the 
High Court for quashing the FIR. By the impugned judgment dated 
1st March 2023, the High Court dismissed the petition.
SUBMISSIONS
4.	
The learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant stated 
that the appellant is the constituted attorney of Vidhya Natekar and 
Sanjay Natekar, the vendors under the sale deeds subject matter 
of the impugned FIR. He submitted that the 4th respondent in his 
complaint had accepted co-ownership of the vendors in respect of 
the subject property under the sale deeds. Learned senior counsel 
submitted that a complaint was filed by the 4th respondent more than 
two years after the date of institution of the civil suit. Learned senior 
counsel pointed out how Sacarama Sadassiva Natecar became the 
owner of the subject property based on documents executed in the 
years 1928 and 1929. He submitted that Vidhya Natekar and Sanjay 
Natekar are the legal representatives of Sacarama Sadassiva Natecar. 
He submitted that both claimed a half share in the subject property 
in view of the regime of the communion of assets applicable in the 
State of Goa. He pointed out that, on 10th May 2013, the appellant 
had published a public notice calling for objections from any interested 
party concerning the subject property. 
5.	
He pointed out that the ingredients of the offence of cheating under 
Section 415 of IPC were not made out. He relied upon a decision 
of this Court in the case of R.K. Vijayasarathy and Anr. v Sudha 
Seetharam and Anr.1 He also relied upon a decision of this Court 
1	
[2019] 2 SCR 185 : (2019) 16 SCC 739
234
in the case of Mohd. Ibrahim v State of Bihar.2 The submission 
of the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant is that 
the registration of the impugned FIR was mala fide. He pointed out 
that the appellant, apart from being a businessman, is an active 
member of the Maharashtra Gomantak Party and is a Member of 
the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa. 
6.	
Learned senior counsel representing the 4th respondent submitted 
that the appellant tried to dishonestly misappropriate the property 
belonging to the 4th respondent, who is a resident of the United States 
of America, and sold the subject property to third parties. He has done 
that with the knowledge that the 4th respondent was a co-owner. He 
submitted that the supplementary statement of the 4th respondent was 
recorded in the impugned FIR. Due to Covid-19, the investigation 
could not be carried out based on the impugned FIR. He relied upon 
a decision of this Court in the case of M/s Neeharika Infrastructure 
Pvt. Ltd. v State of Maharashtra and Ors.3 and submitted that the 
investigation could not be scuttled by interfering with the FIR at the 
initial stage of the investigation. He submitted that an FIR is not an 
encyclopaedia that can disclose all facts and details of the offence. He 
also pointed out that the consideration under the sale deed has been 
transferred to the appellant and not to the members of the Natekar 
family. He submitted that merely because civil suits are pending, that 
is no ground to quash the criminal proceedings as the conduct of a 
party may amount to an offence and may also give rise to civil claims. 
He relied upon a decision of this Court in the case of Amit Kapoor 
v Ramesh Chander and Anr.4 in this regard. The learned counsel 
would submit that an opportunity may be granted to the police to 
complete the investigation by upholding the order of the High Court. 
7.	
The learned counsel appearing for the State of Goa supported the 
impugned judgment and order. 
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
8.	
We have carefully perused one of the sale deeds, which is the 
subject matter of the impugned FIR. The sale deeds are similar. 
2	
[2009] 13 SCR 1254 : (2009) 8 SCC 751
3	
[2021] 4 SCR 1044 : (2021) 19 SCC 401
4	
[2012] 7 SCR 988 : (2012) 9 SCC 460
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
235
Jit Vinayak Arolkar v. State of Goa & Ors.
The appellant signed the sale deed as the constituted attorney of 
Vidhya Natekar and Sanjay Natekar and also in his capacity as a 
confirming party. The said power of attorney executed by Vidhya 
Natekar and Sanjay Natekar in favour of the appellant contains a 
recital that the executants, i.e., Vidhya Natekar and Sanjay Natekar, 
are the co-owners of the subject property. The legal effect of the sale 
deeds which are the subject matters of the impugned FIR is that 
the ownership rights of Vidhya Natekar and Sanjay Natekar were 
transferred to the purchasers.
9.	
It is pertinent to note that civil suits were filed by the 4th respondent 
in October 2018. In the suits, he claims to be a co-owner or person 
with an undivided share in the subject property. Two years after 
the institution of the said suits, the constituted attorney of the 4th 
respondent filed a complaint with the Superintendent of Police on 23rd 
October 2020. In the complaint, she stated that the subject property 
was originally owned by the predecessor of the 4th respondent and 
Sadashiv Natekar. In paragraph 5 of the complaint, the constituted 
attorney of the 4th respondent stated thus:
“5. This vicious and malafide exercise of deceit, forgery and 
land-grabbing has been systematically and high-handedly 
perpetrated by one Mr. Jit Vinayak Arolkar who claims 
to be the Power of Attorney holder of legal heirs 
of Sadashiv Sakharam Natekar. The said Sadashiv 
Natekar was the co-owner of the said property along 
with vaikunth Rawloo Khalap. Thus, it is clear that, the 
said property can in no way be arbitrarily sold without the 
express consent of all the legal heirs of both the Co-owners 
of the said property.” 
(emphasis added)
It is pertinent to note that the constituted attorney of the 4th respondent 
has omitted to mention in the complaint that two years before 
the filing of the complaint, declaratory suits were filed by the 4th 
respondent, which were pending. Interestingly, two years after the 
registration of the FIR, on 13th October 2022, the 4th respondent 
filed a supplementary complaint with the police alleging that even 
the said Vidhya Natekar and Sanjay Natekar had also committed 
an offence. 
236
10.	 Thus, in short, the grievance of the 4th respondent is that the vendors 
under the sale deeds had only an undivided share in the subject 
property, and they could not have sold the entire subject property 
under the sale deeds. The contention of the appellant is that what 
is sold is the right, title and interest of Vidhya Natekar and Sanjay 
Natekar. Thus, the dispute between the parties is predominantly a 
civil dispute. 
11.	 Section 415, which defines cheating, reads thus:
“415. Cheating.—Whoever, by deceiving any person, 
fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived 
to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any 
person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces 
the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which 
he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and 
which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage 
or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, 
is said to “cheat”.
Explanation.—A dishonest concealment of facts is a 
deception within the meaning of this section.”
12.	 It is pertinent to note that the purchasers under the sale deeds 
have not made any grievance about the sale deeds. In the case 
of Mohd. Ibrahim v State of Bihar,2 in paragraphs 20 to 23, this 
Court held thus:
“20. When a sale deed is executed conveying a 
property claiming ownership thereto, it may be 
possible for the purchaser under such sale deed to 
allege that the vendor has cheated him by making a 
false representation of ownership and fraudulently 
induced him to part with the sale consideration. But 
in this case the complaint is not by the purchaser. On 
the other hand, the purchaser is made a co-accused.
21. It is not the case of the complainant that any of the 
accused tried to deceive him either by making a false 
or misleading representation or by any other action 
or omission, nor is it his case that they offered him 
any fraudulent or dishonest inducement to deliver any 
property or to consent to the retention thereof by any 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
237
Jit Vinayak Arolkar v. State of Goa & Ors.
person or to intentionally induce him to do or omit to 
do anything which he would not do or omit if he were 
not so deceived. Nor did the complainant allege that 
the first appellant pretended to be the complainant while 
executing the sale deeds. Therefore, it cannot be said 
that the first accused by the act of executing sale deeds 
in favour of the second accused or the second accused 
by reason of being the purchaser, or the third, fourth and 
fifth accused, by reason of being the witness, scribe and 
stamp vendor in regard to the sale deeds, deceived the 
complainant in any manner.
22. As the ingredients of cheating as stated in Section 
415 are not found, it cannot be said that there was an 
offence punishable under Sections 417, 418, 419 or 420 
of the Code.
A clarification
23. When we say that execution of a sale deed by 
a person, purporting to convey a property which 
is not his, as his property, is not making a false 
document and therefore not forgery, we should 
not be understood as holding that such an act 
can never be a criminal offence. If a person sells 
a property knowing that it does not belong to him, 
and thereby defrauds the person who purchased the 
property, the person defrauded, that is, the purchaser,  
may complain that the vendor committed the fraudulent 
act of cheating. But a third party who is not the 
purchaser under the deed may not be able to make 
such complaint.”
(emphasis added)
12.1	In this case, it is impossible to understand how the appellant 
deceived the 4th respondent and how the act of execution of 
sale deeds by the appellant caused or was likely to cause 
damage or harm to the 4th respondent in body, mind, reputation 
or property. The appellant has not purported to execute the sale 
deeds on behalf of the 4th respondent. He has not purported to 
transfer the rights of the 4th respondent. There is no allegation 
238
that the appellant deceived the 4th respondent to transfer or 
deliver the subject property.
13.	 Taking the complaint as correct, the offence of cheating under Section 
415 of IPC was not made out against the appellant. Moreover, the 
complaint was filed by the 4th respondent for the first time after a time 
gap of two years from the date of institution of the civil suits. In the 
complaint, he suppressed the fact that civil suits were already filed in 
which applications for temporary injunction were made. When there 
was a dispute over the title, the act of the 4th respondent of setting 
in motion criminal law two years after the date of filing of the suits 
amounts to nothing but abuse of the process of law. 
14.	 Considering the above, the appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment 
and order dated 1st March 2023 is set aside, and FIR No.177 of 2020 
initially registered with Pernem Police Station, Pernem in the State 
of Goa, and now transferred to the Special Investigation Team of the 
Economic Offences Cell, and proceedings based thereon are hereby 
quashed and set aside only as against the appellant. Accordingly, 
the appeal is allowed on the above terms. We clarify that we have 
made no adjudication on the merits of the pending civil dispute 
between the parties. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan