[2025] 1 S.C.R. 266 : 2025 INSC 27
Omi @ Omkar Rathore & Anr. 
v. 
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
(Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 17781 of 2024)
03 January 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards summoning a person as accused for 
facing the trial, when the said person was named in the FIR but 
not chargesheeted.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.319 – Power to proceed 
against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence – 
On facts, closure report filed by the I.O. exonerating the 
petitioners from the alleged offence – In examination-in-
chief, the first informant categorically deposed against the 
petitioners and also attributed a specific overt act – On 
basis thereof, an application filed u/s.319 to summon the 
petitioners as accused for facing the trial along with the other 
co-accused – Trial court summoned them in exercise of its 
powers u/s.319 to face the trial – High Court upheld the said 
the order – Correctness:
Held: High Court committed no error in passing the impugned 
order – Person is named in the FIR by the complainant but the 
police, after investigation finds no role of that particular person 
and files charge-sheet without implicating him, the Court is not 
powerless and at the stage of summoning, if the trial court finds 
that a particular person should be summoned as accused, even 
though not named in the charge-sheet, it can do so,  provided 
during the trial some evidence surfaces against the proposed 
accused – Closure report filed by the police in the instant case is 
yet to be looked into by the court concerned, and has not been 
accepted till this date – However, the closure report now pales 
into insignificance in view of the order passed by the trial court 
u/s.319 summoning the petitioners to face the trial – It would have 
been in fitness of things if the court concerned would have looked 
into the closure report at the earliest and passed an appropriate 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
267
Omi @ Omkar Rathore & Anr. v. The State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
order one way or the other after hearing the defacto-complainant. 
[Paras 16, 18, 19, 20]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.319 – Power to proceed 
against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence – 
Principles of law as regards s.319:
Held: Trial court has undoubted jurisdiction to add any person 
not being the accused before it to face the trial along with other 
accused persons, if the Court is satisfied at any stage of the 
proceedings on the evidence adduced that the persons who 
have not been arrayed as accused should face the trial – Such 
person even though had initially been named in the FIR as an 
accused, but not charge sheeted, can also be added to face the 
trial – Trial court can take such a step to add such persons as 
accused only on the basis of evidence adduced before it and 
not on the basis of materials available in the chargesheet or 
the case diary, because such materials contained in the charge 
sheet or the case diary do not constitute evidence – Power of 
the court u/s.319 is not controlled or governed by naming or not 
naming of the person concerned in the FIR – Nor the same is 
dependent upon submission of the chargesheet by the police 
against the person concerned – Phrase 'any person not being 
the accused' in s.319 clearly covers any person who is not being 
tried already by the Court and the very purpose of enacting 
s.319(1) is that even persons who have been dropped by the 
police during investigation but against whom evidence showing 
their involvement in the offence comes before the criminal court 
are included in the said expression – It would not be proper for 
the trial court to reject the application for addition of new accused 
by considering records of the Investigating Officer – When the 
evidence of complainant is found to be worthy of acceptance 
then the satisfaction of the IO hardly matters – If satisfaction of 
IO is to be treated as determinative then the purpose of s.319 
would be frustrated. [Para 21]
Case Law Cited
Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab [2014] 2 SCR 1 : (2014) 3  
SCC 92 : (2014) 2 SCC (Cri) 86 – followed.
Ramesh Chandra Srivastava v. State of U.P. & Another [2021] 6 
SCR 219 : (2021) 12 SCC 608; S. Mohammed Ispahani v. Yogendra 
Chandak [2017] 10 SCR 29 : (2017) 16 SCC 226 – referred to.
268
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Summoning person as accused for facing the trial; Exercise of 
powers u/s.319 CrPC; Person named in FIR but not chargesheeted; 
Power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty 
of offence; Closure report; Examination-in-chief; Summon;  
Defacto-complainant.
Case Arising From
EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Special Leave 
Petition (Crl.) No. 17781 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.10.2024 of the High court 
of Madhya Pradesh at Gwalior in CRR No. 3172 of 2022
Appearances for Parties
Anil Kaushik, Sr. Adv., Siddharth Sijoria, Ms. Swati Setia, Abhishek 
Mishra, Mayank Gautam, Anurag Andley, Asha Ram Shivhare, 
Advs. for the Petitioners.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
This petition arises from the judgment and order passed by the 
High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Gwalior dated 23-10-2024 in 
Criminal Revision No.3172/2022, by which the High Court rejected 
the revision application filed by the petitioners – herein and 
thereby affirmed the order passed by the 4th Additional Sessions 
Judge, Gwalior in Sessions Trial No.233/2018 summoning the 
petitioners – herein to face the trial for the offence of murder in 
exercise of powers under Section 319 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973.
2.	
The First Information Report bearing Crime No.96/18 came to be 
registered with the Padav Police Station, District Gwalior for the 
offence punishable under Sections 302, 307, 147, 148 and 149 of 
the Indian Penal Code (for, short the “IPC”).
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
269
Omi @ Omkar Rathore & Anr. v. The State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
3.	
The FIR came to be registered in all against seven individuals. The 
FIR includes the name of the two petitioners – herein. 
4.	
At the end of the investigation, the Investigating Officer filed a 
closure report so far as the two petitioners – herein are concerned. 
Against the other accused persons, the charge-sheet was filed for 
the offences enumerated above.
5.	
The Trial Court started recording oral evidence. The original first 
informant – PW3 stepped into the box.  In his examination-in-chief, 
he reiterated what he narrated in the FIR. 
6.	
In his examination-in-chief the PW3 – Raghvendra Tomar,  deposed 
as under :-
“1. The date of the incident is 20.02.2018. I had gone to 
the District Court with Abhishek Tomar for appearing in a 
case. While returning after hearing, Pankaj Sikarwar, Veeru 
Tomar in an Apache vehicle, Sonu Rathore, Omi Rathore, 
Ravindra Sikarwar, Vijay Bhadoriya and Amit Bhadoriya in 
a Safari car surrounded us near the LIC office at Tansen 
Nagar Road. After surrounding us, Pankaj Sikarwar shot 
at us  with a pistol which hit Abhishek in his head. The 
second shot was fired by Veeru Tomar which hit Abhishek 
in the stomach. Then Sonu Rathore, Omi Rathore, Ravindra 
Sikarwar, Vijay Bhadoriya, Amit Bhadoriya, all of them 
together shot Abhishek with the common intention of 
killing him. Then Raman and Sanjay came from behind 
on a bike and tried to save Abhishek. All these people 
fired at them too. After firing, these people fled from the 
place of occurrence.
2. After this we called an ambulance. As soon as the 
ambulance arrived, the police also arrived on the spot. As 
soon as the police arrived, we brought Abhishek to Sahara 
Hospital by an ambulance. In Sahara Hospital, the doctors 
declared Abhishek dead. As soon as all his family members 
arrived then his body was taken for postmortem. I lodged 
a Dehatinalishi, which is Ex.P/10, whereupon A to A part 
bears my signature. First Information Report was registered 
on the basis of Dehatinalishi. The map panchayatnama 
was prepared before me which is Ex.P/11, on which A to 
270
A part bears my signature. Police called me to the police 
station and questioned me and took my statement. I am 
able to identify the accused persons. Among the accused 
persons produced through VC of Gwalior jail, I recognize 
accused Veeru Tomar, but I do not know the remaining 
accused Rahul Rajawat and Anand Rathore. I do not 
recognize to accused Banti alias Ajay produced through 
VC of Badwani jail. Seeing the accused Prithviraj present 
in the court, the witness expressed that I do not recognize 
him. I also do not recognize to the absent accused Gaurav. 
I do not know to Vikram by name; if he appears in the 
Court then I can recognize him.”
7.	
Thus, it appears that in the examination-in-chief, the original first 
informant categorically deposed against the two petitioners – herein 
and also attributed a specific overt act.
8.	
Relying on the oral evidence of PW-3, an application was filed under 
Section 319 of the Code to summon the two petitioners as accused 
for the purpose of facing the trial along with the other co-accused.
9.	
The petitioners being dissatisfied with the order passed by the Trial 
Court summoning them to face the trial preferred Criminal Revision 
Application before the High Court. The High Court rejected the 
revision application and thereby affirmed the order passed by the 
Trial Court summoning the petitioners in exercise of its powers under 
Section 319 of the CrPC.
10.	 In such circumstances, referred to above, the petitioners are here 
before this Court with the present petition.
11.	 We have heard Mr. Anil Kaushik, the learned Senior counsel appearing 
for the petitioners.
12.	 In Ramesh Chandra Srivastava v. State of U.P. & Another (2021) 12 
SCC 608 while this Court has approved of relying upon deposition 
which has not suffered cross-examination for the purpose of invoking 
Section 319 CrPC, it is relevant to note the standards which have 
been fixed by this Court for invoking the power under Section 319 
CrPC. The statement of law in this regard is contained in paras 105 
and 106 respectively of Hardeep Singh [Hardeep Singh v. State of 
Punjab (2014) 3 SCC 92 : (2014) 2 SCC (Cri) 86] : (SCC p. 138)
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
271
Omi @ Omkar Rathore & Anr. v. The State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
“105. Power under Section 319 CrPC is a discretionary 
and an extraordinary power. It is to be exercised sparingly 
and only in those cases where the circumstances of the 
case so warrant. It is not to be exercised because the 
Magistrate or the Sessions Judge is of the opinion that 
some other person may also be guilty of committing that 
offence. Only where strong and cogent evidence occurs 
against a person from the evidence led before the court 
that such power should be exercised and not in a casual 
and cavalier manner.
106. Thus, we hold that though only a prima facie case is 
to be established from the evidence led before the court, 
not necessarily tested on the anvil of cross-examination, 
it requires much stronger evidence than mere probability 
of his complicity. The test that has to be applied is one 
which is more than prima facie case as exercised at the 
time of framing of charge, but short of satisfaction to an 
extent that the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead to 
conviction. In the absence of such satisfaction, the court 
should refrain from exercising power under Section 319 
CrPC. In Section 319 CrPC the purpose of providing if 
‘it appears from the evidence that any person not being 
the accused has committed any offence’ is clear from the 
words ‘for which such person could be tried together with 
the accused.’ The words used are not ‘for which such 
person could be convicted’. There is, therefore, no scope 
for the court acting under Section 319 CrPC to form any 
opinion as to the guilt of the accused.”
13.	 The test as laid down by the Constitution Bench of this Court for 
invoking the powers under Section 319 CrPC inter alia includes the 
principle that only when strong and cogent evidence occurs against 
a person from the evidence the power under Section 319 CrPC 
should be exercised. The power cannot be exercised in a casual 
and cavalier manner. The test to be applied, as laid down by this 
Court, is one which is more than prima facie which is applied at 
the time of framing of charges. It will all depend upon the evidence 
which is tendered in a given case as to whether there is a strong 
ground within the meaning of para 105 of Hardeep Singh (supra)
referred to above.
272
14.	 The only argument canvassed before us is that the Trial Court before 
summoning the petitioners as accused in exercise of its powers under 
Section 319 of the CrPC should have taken into consideration the 
closure report filed by the I.O. exonerating the petitioners from the 
alleged offence. According to the learned counsel, the Trial Court 
as well as the High Court should not have overlooked the report 
because the report clearly states that the two petitioners – herein 
are in no manner connected with the alleged crime. 
15.	 The closure report is on the record of this case. The relevant portion 
of the closure report reads thus: 
“Since the offence under section-302,307,147,148,149,120B 
IPC & 25/27 Arms Act was found proved against Accused 
persons Gajendra alias Gadra S/o Ramjilal Koli (Mahor) 
aged 25 years resident of Tundila Police station Malanpur, 
Bhind and Pussu alias Pushpendra Bhadoriya son of 
Yogendra Singh Bhadoriya aged 26 years, R/o Kashi 
Naresh ki Gali, P.S. Kilagate Gwalior, so issuing the 
supplementary chargesheet No.86D/2018 on 08.11.2020, 
it was produced before the court of respected CJM Sir 
Gwalior vide missal No. 1776/18 on 09/11.2020.
That the complainant Raghvendra Singh Tomar has got 
written the names of Pankaj Sikarwar, Ravindra Sikarwar, 
Sonu Rathore, Omi alias Omkar Rathore, Vijay Bhadoriya, 
Amit Bhadoriya in the FIR. During the investigation, 
applications were given in the superior office by Poonam 
Rathore, Rajendra Singh Bhadoriya, Santosh Singh 
Sikarwar who are the family members of aforesaid persons. 
Action was taken by including the applications in the 
investigation. During the proceedings, CDR and statements 
of Smt. Poonam Rathore, Rajendra Singh Bhadoriya, 
Santosh Singh Sikarwar, Rakesh alias Banti Mishra, Mukesh 
Bhadoriya, Mahesh Singh alias Pintu Shikarwar, Rajabeti 
Tomar, Anita Sikarwar, Girija Devi Sikarwar, Dharmendra 
Singh Parihar, Vinod Nagar, Shambhu Singh Parihar, Bharat 
Singh Parihar, Narayan Chhawda, Dharmendra Gaud, 
Anurag alias Cheeku Rine were recorded and records 
relating to FIR of named accused persons and complainant 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
273
Omi @ Omkar Rathore & Anr. v. The State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
in the case in various police stations were collected. It was 
found suspicious the presence of the above named accused 
at the scene of incident. Presently sufficient evidence is 
not available against them. 
Statement of witness Rajender Singh Bhadoriya was 
recorded regarding presence of accused Vijay Bhadoria 
and Amit Bhadoriya in different place from the incident. 
Applicant Rajendra Singh Bhadoriya stated in his 
statement that he had three sons, the eldest being Ajay 
Bhadoria, second son Sanjay Bhadoria both are mentally 
handicapped and third son was Suraj Bhadoria who was 
murdered on the door of my house on 21.10.2013 by 
Abhishek Tomar, Parimal Tomar, Manish Kori, Deepak 
Jat and other here persons whose FIR was lodged under 
section 302 in police station Gwalior. Abhishek Tomar 
was the main accused, he had shot a bullet to my son 
Suraj. Amit Bhadoriya is a witness in a case of my son 
Suraj and Vijay Singh Bhadoria is family uncle (Tau) of 
Suraj. Amit Bhadoria is with me in the case of my son 
Suraj. Names of Amit and Vijay Bhadoria have been got 
written to put pressure in the case. On the date of incident 
20.02.2018, Amit Bhataria had gone to attend his duty 
in Civil Hospital Morar at 7.30 am in the morning and 
he stayed there till 3.45 pm in the evening, after that, 
he returned to his home Yadav Dharam Kanta where he 
stayed till 6:00 O’clock of evening and Vijay Bhadoria 
is posted with me and my guard Rajkumar Bhadoria 
HC 188 in 13th Battalion is posted in Gwalior. Sanjay 
Agarwal, Uma Bauhan, Arvind Singh Kushwah R/o Indore 
were present in the wedding of my friend Rakesh Vyas’s 
brother-in-law’s daughter in Kanak Garden at 2:00 pm, 
in which all of we stayed till 3:30 pm and then went to 
Maharajpura Air Force Station to drop Uma aunty. We 
stayed there till about 4:00 pm, after leaving to Uma 
Chauhan, all of we went to Vijay Tomar’s house behind 
Hotel Adityaj, we took tea there and we stayed till 5:00 
O’clock in the evening, writing the detailed statement, it 
was included with CD, thus presence of accused persons 
Amit Bhadoria and Vijay Bhadoria has not been found at 
the place of incident.
274
Statements of witnesses Pintu Sikarwar, Smt. Girja Devi, 
Raja beti and Anita Sikarwar were recorded in respect of 
the presence of accused Pankaj Sikarwar and Ravindra 
Sikarwar apart from the incident place. They told that 
Pankaj Sikarwar and Ravindra Sikarwar were sleeping at 
their home at about 4.30 O’clock in the evening on 20.02.18 
and Witness Santosh Singh stated in his statement that 
Pankaj Sikarwar and Ravindra Sikarwar were present at 
their home at 4.30 O’clock in the evening on 20.02.18. 
Thereafter Pankaj Sikarwar and Ravindra Sikarwar reached 
at their side (workplace) at Adityapuram and reached 
City Centre at 5:00 pm. Raghavendra Tomar, Ravindra 
Chauhan and Sanjay Tomar used to have animosity with 
Pankaj and Ravindra.
That Pankaj Sikarwar had lodged a case Crime No. 22/17 
under Section 307 of IPC against Raman Chauhan, Manoj 
Kirar, Parmal Tomar and deceased Abhishek Tomar in 
police station Hajira in which Pankaj was shot a bullet in 
which chargesheet has been produced before the court. 
Manoj Kirar had lodged a cross case relating to same 
incident Crime No. 23/17 under section 307 against 
Pankaj Sikarwar, Ravindra Shikarwar, Sonu Rathore and 
Pankaj’s brother Bhoora alias Omkar Sikarwar. In which 
during investigation, due to not getting any evidence for 
chargesheet, FR was issued. Raman Chauhan’s brother 
Neeraj Chauhan had lodged a case crime No. 275/17 
under Section 308,34 of IPC in PS Hajira on 15.06.17 
against suspects Pankaj Sikarwar, Ravindra Sikarwar, Sonu 
Rathore and Saurabh Rajawat and on 27.10.17, Sandeep 
Sikarwar who is brother-in-law of Raman Chauhan had 
lodged a case Crime No. 534/10 under section 307 in PS 
Gole Ka Mandir against Pankaj Sikarwar, Sonu Rathore 
and Ravindra Sikarwar in which involvement of Pankaj 
Sikarwar, Sonu Rathore and Ravindra Sikarwar was not 
found, and investigation was conducted by the C.S.P. 
Maharajpura Sir in his matter, it was disclosed in the 
investigation that complainant Sandeep Sikarwar brother 
in law of Raman Chauhan had lodged the names due to 
animosity. Pankaj had lodged a case bearing Crime No. 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
275
Omi @ Omkar Rathore & Anr. v. The State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
22/2017 under Section 307 of IPC against Raghvendra 
Tomar’s brother Parmal Tomar, due to which, Raghvedra 
Tomar had got the names of Vijay Bhadoria, Amit Bhadoria, 
Pankaj Sikarwar, Sonu Rathore, Ravindra Sikarwar and 
Omi alias Omkar Rathor lodged for mounting pressure in 
the matter. 
That the call details of 20.02.18 of Pankaj Sikarwar and 
Ravinder Sikarwar were obtained in which at 15.08 pm at 
the time of occurrence of crime, tower location of Pankaj 
Sikarwar’s mobile no. 9425187361 was in Rameshwari 
Nagar Gadaipura Gwalior from 16.15 to 16.45 pm and tower 
location of Ravindra Sikarwar’s Mobile No. 9754530830 
was obtained in which it was found at Rameshwari Nagar 
Gadaipura Gwalior from 14:00 and 16:48 pm, Pankaj 
Sikarwar has been murdered in the area of police station 
Hazira.
That when the statement of Neeraj Mishra was recorded 
then he stated that on 20.02.18, he talked with Ravindra 
Sikarwar at about 4.30 p.m. then Ravindra Sikarwar was at 
his home at that time of the incident and witness Rakesh 
alias Banti Mishra told in his statement that the information 
was received at about 4.00 O’clock in the evening on 
20.02.18 that Abhishek Tomar has been murdered then I 
reached to the house of Pankaj Sikarwar, Pankaj Sikarwar 
was sleeping at his home at that time, I got awoke to Pankaj 
and told about the happening of incident then I went to 
Ravindra’s house with Pankaj, after that Ravindra and 
Pankaj went somewhere by a car. Similarly, the presence of 
accused persons Pankaj Sikarwar and Ravindra Sikarwar 
has not been found at the scene of the incident. That in 
connection with the presence of accused Sonu Rathore 
separate from the incident, statement of witness Poonam 
Rathore wife of accused Sonu Rathore was recorded, 
who said in her statement that on 20.02.18, my husband 
Sonu Rathore had gone to the shop named Subham 
Band Rajakheda in village Padua Pura, Pinahat, district 
Agra at 10-30 O’clock in the morning by his Innova car 
to get a band for the wedding of my nephew Annu alias 
Anupam, who was with the band owner between 4:00 to 
276
5:00 pm, the bill of the band is made in the name of my 
husband, the statement of the shop owner named Vinod 
was recorded, who told in his statement that Sonu Rathore 
was present at his shop Subham Band Rajakheda in 
Pinahat district Agra between 4:00 to 5:00 o’clock in the 
evening on 20.02.18 thus the presence of accused Sonu 
Rathore was not found at the spot of incident.
That on 05.01.18, witness Santosh Singh Sikarwar 
appeared at the police station who had stated that the 
CCTV footage of accused in the case Omi alias Omkar 
Rathore in the bank from 4:00 to 5:00 pm on 20.02.18 
was preserved in the bank. Thereafter correspondence 
was made with Bank and CCTV footage was obtained 
in which Omi alias Omkar Rathore is seen present in 
the bank from 4:00 to 5:00 pm on 20.02.18, photos of 
which are attached in the diary. Similarly, the presence of 
Omi alias Omkar Rathore was not found at the place of 
incident. The above mentioned facts have come to light 
in the investigation conducted by the then investigating 
officer Inspector Santosh Singh.
That, after the transfer of Inspector Santosh Singh, further 
investigation of the case was conducted by Inspector 
Kamlesh Prajapati of Police Station Padav, Inspector 
Sanju Kamle Officer Incharge of Police Station padav, 
Inspector Anil Bhadauriya officer Incharge of Police Station 
Padav, Inspector Prashant Yadav officer Incharge of 
Police Station Padav, S.I. Balbir Mawai officer Incharge of 
Police Station Padav, Inspector Gyanendra Singh, officer 
Incharge, Police Station Padav, later on the investigation 
of the case was done by me, Inspector Vivek Ashthana, 
Police Station Padav. 
Another accused in the case Pankaj Sikarwar has been 
murdered earlier in area of police station Hajira. Name 
of Pankaj Sikarwar is separated from this case. Death 
certificate of Pankaj Sikarwar is included in this regard. 
The above named accused persons are 01 - Vijay 
Bhadoria son of Faujdar Bhadoria resident of Kala Mahal 
Char Shahar ka Naka, 02 - Amit Bhadoria son of Shiv 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
277
Omi @ Omkar Rathore & Anr. v. The State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
Singh resident of Sadar, 03- Ravindra Sikarwar son of 
Rambir Singh Sikarwar, 42 years, resident of Gopal Nagar 
Gadaipura, Birlanagar Gwalior 04- Sonu Rathore son of late 
Shri Brijendra Singh Rathore, 39 years, resident of Char 
Shahar Ka Naka, Ranipur Hajira Gwalior, 05. Omi alias 
Omkar Rathore son of late Shri Brajendra Singh Rathore, 
age 45 years, resident of Dhar Shahar Naka Ranipur 
Hajira Gwalior, have not been found present at scene of 
incident. There is complete lack of evidence against the 
above accused prersons. At present, no sufficient evidence 
is available against them for challan proceedings. After 
obtaining permission from the Superintendent of Police, 
District Gwalior, Closure report was made against the 
above accused persons on 04.03.2022. Which would be 
produced before the Honourable Court.
Previously arrested accused persons in the case : Due to 
being found the offence proved against i.e. 1. Prithviraj alias 
Raj son of Vijay Singh Chauhan aged 20 years resident 
of Gudha Gudhi ka Naka Kampu Gwalior, 2. Banty alias 
Ajay Bhadoriya son of Shyam Singh Bhadoriya aged 23 
years, Resident of Shitla Mata ke bagal ke Kanchmill 
Hajira Gwalior 3. Anand alias Annu Rathore son of Naresh 
Rathore, aged 23 years, Resident Hanuman Chauraha 
opposite Gupta Coal Depot, Laxmiganj Gwalior 4. Virendra 
alias Veeru Tomar son of Bahadur Singh Tomar, age 37 
years, resident of Indranagar Char Shahar ka Naka Hajira 
Gwalior 5. Gaurav Rana s/o Manoj Rana, aged 21 years, 
resident of village Udaipur Post Bijoli, Police Station Bijol, 
District Gwalior 6. Rahul Rajawat son of Ravindra Rajawat, 
aged 26 years, resident of New Colony No.-01, Kanchmill, 
Hajira Gwalior 7. Vikram Singh Rana son of Diwan Singh 
Rana, age 27 years, resident of village Bijoli, Gwalior 8. 
Surendra alias Meenu Rathore son of Pan Singh Rathore, 
age 25 years, resident of Indranagar Vyas Wali Gali, Char 
Shahar ka Naka, Hajira Gwalior, 9. Gajendra alias Gadra 
Koli alias Mahor son of Ramji Lal Koli, aged 25 years, 
resident of village Tundila, Police Station Malanpur, District 
Bhind, 10. Pushpendra alias Pussu son of Gopendra Singh 
Bhadoriya, age 26 years, resident of Kashi Naresh Ki Gali 
278
Kila gate Gwalior the crime was proved against Kilagate 
Gwalior, a challan has already issued and produced before 
the honourable court. Therefore the report is respectfully 
sent to your goodself. 
Sd/- 16.03.2022  
Officer in charge Police  
Station Padav, District  
Gwalior.”
16.	 We are not impressed with the submission as noted in para 14 above 
canvassed by the learned Senior counsel for the simple reason that 
a person is named in the FIR by the complainant but the police, 
after investigation finds no role of that particular person  and files 
charge-sheet without implicating him, the Court is not powerless and 
at the stage of summoning, if the Trial Court finds that a particular 
person should be summoned as accused, even though not named 
in the charge-sheet, it can do so. 
17.	 In the aforesaid context, we may refer to a decision of this Court in 
the case of S. Mohammed Ispahani v. Yogendra Chandak (2017) 16 
SCC 226 wherein the Court observed in Para 35 as under:-
“It needs to be highlighted that when a person is named in 
the FIR by the complainant, but police, after investigation, 
finds no role of that particular person and files the charge-
sheet without implicating him, the Court is not powerless, 
and at the stage of summoning, if the trial court finds that 
a particular person should be summoned as accused, even 
though not named in the charge-sheet, it can do so. At 
that stage, chance is given to the complainant also to file 
a protest petition urging upon the trial court to summon 
other persons as well who were named in the FIR but not 
implicated in the charge-sheet. Once that stage has gone, 
the Court is still not powerless by virtue of Section 319 
CrPC. However, this section gets triggered when during 
the trial some evidence surfaces against the proposed 
accused.”	
18.	 Thus, even in a case where the stage of giving opportunity to the 
complainant to file a protest petition urging upon the trial court to 
summon other persons as well who were named in the FIR but not 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
279
Omi @ Omkar Rathore & Anr. v. The State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
implicated in the charge-sheet has gone, in that case also, the Court 
is still not powerless by virtue of Section 319 CrPC and even those 
persons named in the FIR but not implicated in the charge-sheet 
can be summoned to face the trial provided during the trial some 
evidence surfaces against the proposed accused.
19.	 It is relevant to note at this stage that the closure report filed by 
the police in the case on hand is yet to be looked into by the court 
concerned. The same has not been accepted till this date. However, 
the closure report now pales into insignificance in view of the order 
passed by the trial court under Section 319 of the Cr.P.C. summoning 
the petitioners herein to force the trial. We may only add that it would 
have been in fitness of things if the Court concerned would have 
looked into the closure report at the earliest & passed an appropriate 
order one way or the other after hearing the defacto-complainant. The 
Court should not keep the closure report pending for consideration 
for a long time. Such report should be looked into promptly. 
20.	 In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced that the High 
Court committed no error not to speak of any error of law in passing 
the impugned order.
21.	 The principles of law as regards Section 319 of the CrPC may be 
summarised as under: 
a.	
On a careful reading of Section 319 of the CrPC as well as the 
aforesaid two decisions, it becomes clear that the trial court has 
undoubted jurisdiction to add any person not being the accused 
before it to face the trial along with other accused persons, if 
the Court is satisfied at any stage of the proceedings on the 
evidence adduced that the persons who have not been arrayed 
as accused should face the trial. It is further evident that such 
person even though had initially been named in the F.I.R. as 
an accused, but not charge sheeted, can also be added to 
face the trial.
b.	
The trial court can take such a step to add such persons as 
accused only on the basis of evidence adduced before it and 
not on the basis of materials available in the charge-sheet or 
the case diary, because such materials contained in the charge 
sheet or the case diary do not constitute evidence.
280
c.	
The power of the court under Section 319 of the CrPC is 
not controlled or governed by naming or not naming of the 
person concerned in the FIR. Nor the same is dependent upon 
submission of the chargesheet by the police against the person 
concerned. As regards the contention that the phrase ‘any 
person not being the accused’ occurred in Section 319 excludes 
from its operation an accused who has been released by the 
police under Section 169 of the Code and has been shown in 
column No. 2 of the charge sheet, the contention has merely 
to be stated to be rejected. The said expression clearly covers 
any person who is not being tried already by the Court and the 
very purpose of enacting such a provision like Section 319(1) 
clearly shows that even persons who have been dropped by the 
police during investigation but against whom evidence showing 
their involvement in the offence comes before the Criminal Court 
are included in the said expression.
c.	
It would not be proper for the trial court to reject the application 
for addition of new accused by considering records of the 
Investigating Officer. When the evidence of complainant is 
found to be worthy of acceptance then the satisfaction of the 
Investigating Officer hardly matters. If satisfaction of Investigating 
Officer is to be treated as determinative then the purpose of 
Section 319 would be frustrated. 
22.	 In the result, this petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
23.	 It is needless to clarify that it shall be open for the petitioners  to 
raise  all  contentions  available  to them in law before the Trial Court 
including placing reliance on the closure report whatever its worth.
24.	 Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Petition dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain