[2025] 2 S.C.R. 1845 : 2025 INSC 528
Shahjahan 
v. 
The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr. 
R1: The State of Uttar Pradesh  
R2: Sri Gaffar Khan
(Criminal Appeal No. 2112 of 2025)
04 February 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia and Ahsanuddin Amanullah,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to the correctness of the order passed by the High 
Court upholding the order passed by family court not awarding any 
maintenance to the appellant-wife.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.125 – Maintenance – 
Appellant-wife married to respondent no.2-husband according 
to Islamic customs and had two children – Husband filed 
divorce suit against the appellant in the ‘Court of Kazi’ which 
came to be dismissed in terms of the compromise between 
the parties – Three years later, husband filed for divorce in the 
‘Court of (Darul Kaja) Kajiyat’ which was allowed – Thereafter, 
appellant filed suit u/s.125 seeking maintenance for herself 
and two children – Family court allowed the petition for 
maintenance for the children, however rejected the appellant’s 
claim for maintenance on the finding that husband did not 
leave the appellant rather she left the matrimonial home – 
Revision petition by the appellant – Dismissed by the High 
Court – Correctness:
Held: Reasoning by the Family court that since it was the second 
marriage of the parties, there is no possibility of demand of dowry 
by husband, as he would be trying to rehabilitate his house is 
unknown to the canons of law and is based on mere conjecture 
and surmise – Family court could not have presumed that second 
marriage for both parties would necessarily entail no dowry 
* Author
1846
Supreme Court Reports
demand  – Family court, taking note of the compromise deed, 
opined that it was the appellant’s character and conduct which led 
to the rift in the conjugal life of the parties based on the purported 
fact that the appellant in the compromise deed had admitted to 
her mistake, however in the compromise deed there was no such 
admission – Very basis/reasoning for rejecting the appellant’s 
claim for maintenance appears to be ex-facie unsustainable – 
Maintenance could not have been denied to the appellant-wife 
under the prevailing circumstances – Respondent no.2 to pay 
Rs.4,000/- pm as maintenance to the appellant – Maintenance to 
be paid from the date of filing of the maintenance petition before 
the Family Court – Order of family court and impugned order set 
aside. [Paras 14, 15]
Judicial fora – Informal justice delivery system – ‘Court of Kazi’, 
‘Court of (Darul Kaja) Kajiyat’, ‘Sharia Court’ – Recognition 
in law: 
Held: ‘Court of Kazi’, ‘Court of (Darul Kaja) Kajiyat’, ‘Sharia Court’ 
etc. by whatever name styled have no recognition in law – Any 
declaration/decision by such bodies, by whatever name labelled, 
is not binding on anyone and is unenforceable by resort to any 
coercive measure – Only way such declaration/decision can 
withstand scrutiny in the eye of law could be when the affected 
parties accept such declaration/decision by acting thereon or 
accepting it and when such action does not conflict with any other 
law – Even then, such declaration/decision, at best, would only be 
valid inter-se the parties that choose to act upon/accept the same, 
and not a third-party. [Para 23]
Case Law Cited
Rajnesh v. Neha [2020] 13 SCR 1093 : (2021) 2 SCC 324 – 
relied on. 
Nagarathinam v. State, through the Inspector of Police [2023] 
4 SCR 1124 : 2023 SCC OnLine SC 559; Vishwa Lochan  
Madan v. Union of India [2014] 8 SCR 195 : (2014) 7 SCC  
707 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1847
Shahjahan v. The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
List of Keywords
Divorce under Islamic law; Maintenance; ‘Court of (Darul Kaja) 
Kajiyat’; ‘Court of Kazi’; Unknown to canons of law; Mere conjecture 
and surmise; Ex-facie unsustainable; Beneficial piece of legislation; 
Date of filing of maintenance petition; Decision valid inter-se parties; 
Revision petition; Compromise; Family court; Demand of dowry; 
Maintenance to be paid from the date of filing of maintenance 
petition before Family Court; Informal justice delivery system; 
‘Court of (Darul Kaja) Kajiyat’; ‘Sharia Court’.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
2112 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 03.08.2018 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in CRR No. 2829 of 2010
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Sushil Kumar Dubey, Rameshwar Prasad Goyal.
Advs. for the Respondents:
A.K. Misra, Sr. Adv. / A.G., Arup Banerjee, Amitabh Poddar, 
Priyanshu Raj, Harshita Raghuvanshi, Rajiv Agnihotri.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Ahsanuddin Amanullah, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeal is directed against the Final Judgment and Order 
dated 03.08.2018 in Criminal Revision No.2829/2010 (hereinafter 
referred to as the ‘Impugned Order’)1 passed by the High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad (hereinafter referred to as the ‘High Court’), 
whereby the revision petition filed by the appellant-wife was dismissed 
1	
2018 SCC OnLine All 7101 : (2018) 6 All LJ 55.
1848
Supreme Court Reports
and the Order dated 23.04.2010 in Petition No.335 of 2008 passed 
by the Principal Judge, Family Court, Jhansi (hereinafter referred 
to as the ‘Family Court’) not awarding any maintenance to the 
appellant-wife, was upheld. 
FACTUAL BACKGROUND:
3.	
The marriage of the appellant-wife was solemnized with the respondent 
no. 2-husband on 24.09.2002 according to Islamic customs. This was 
the second marriage of both. From their wedlock, the appellant gave 
birth to two children, namely daughter Aatika (aged about 21 years 
presently) and son Muzammil (aged about 16 years presently). In 
2005, respondent no.2 filed ‘Divorce Suit No.325 of 2005’2 against 
the appellant in the ‘Court of Kazi’,3 Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, which 
came to be dismissed in terms of the compromise dated 22.11.2005 
entered into between the two parties.
4.	
The appellant alleged that respondent no.2 used to beat her 
demanding dowry and turned her out of the matrimonial home along 
with her children in May, 2008. On 16.09.2008, respondent no.2 filed 
‘Suit No.221 of 2008’4 in the ‘Court of (Darul Kaja) Kajiyat’,5 Bhopal 
seeking divorce. Soon thereafter, on 13.10.2008, the appellant 
filed Suit No.335/2008 under Section 1256 of the Code of Criminal 
2	
The usage of the apostrophe is deliberate; we will advert to this in the latter part of the Judgment.
3	
Ibid.
4	
Ibid.
5	
Ibid.
6	
‘125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents.—(1) If any person having sufficient 
means neglects or refuses to maintain—
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable to maintain itself, or
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has attained majority, 
where such child is, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury unable to maintain 
itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself,
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to 
make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, at such 
monthly rate, as such Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate 
may from time to time direct:
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child referred to in clause (b) to 
make such allowance, until she attains her majority, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the husband 
of such minor female child, if married, is not possessed of sufficient means:
Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the pendency of the proceeding regarding monthly 
allowance for the maintenance under this sub-section, order such person to make a monthly 
allowance for the interim maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, and the expenses 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1849
Shahjahan v. The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Code’) seeking 
maintenance of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand) per month for 
herself and Rs.1,000/- (Rupees One Thousand) per month for each 
of the children. The ‘suit’ of respondent no.2 for divorce was allowed, 
and, accordingly Talaqnama dated 22.01.2009 was prepared. 
5.	
The Family Court vide Order dated 23.04.2010 partly allowed the petition 
for maintenance and granted Rs.1,500/- (Rupees One Thousand Five 
Hundred) per month to the daughter Aatika and Rs.1,000/- (Rupees 
One Thousand) per month to the son Muzammil. The Family Court 
dismissed the appellant’s claim for maintenance on the finding that 
the respondent no.2-husband did not leave the appellant and rather, 
she herself, due to her nature and conduct, was the main reason for 
the dispute and her consequent departure from the matrimonial home. 
of such proceeding which the Magistrate considers reasonable, and to pay the same to such 
person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim maintenance and 
expenses for proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within 
sixty days from the date of the service of notice of the application to such person.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(a) “minor” means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875), 
is deemed not to have attained his majority;
(b) “wife” includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her 
husband and has not remarried.
(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses for proceeding 
shall be payable from the date of the order, or, if so ordered, from the date of the application for 
maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be.
(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply with the order, any such 
Magistrate may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the 
manner provided for levying fines, and may sentence such person, for the whole or any part of each 
month’s allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, 
as the case may be, remaining unpaid after the execution of the warrant, to imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one month or until payment if sooner made:
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under this section 
unless application be made to the Court to levy such amount within a period of one year from the 
date on which it became due:
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her living with him, 
and she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any grounds of refusal stated by 
her, and may make an order under this section notwithstanding such offer, if he is satisfied that 
there is just ground for so doing.
Explanation.—If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps a mistress, it 
shall be considered to be just ground for his wife’s refusal to live with him.
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance 
and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be, from her husband under this section if she is 
living in adultery, or if, without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her husband, or if they 
are living separately by mutual consent.
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under this section is living in 
adultery, or that without sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband, or that they are living 
separately by mutual consent, the Magistrate shall cancel the order.’
1850
Supreme Court Reports
6.	
Aggrieved by the Order supra of the Family Court, the appellant-wife 
approached the High Court by filing Criminal Revision No.2829/2010. 
The High Court vide the Impugned Order dismissed the revision 
petition noting that since the appellant is living separately from her 
husband-respondent no.2 without sufficient reason, therefore, the 
findings recorded by the Court below cannot be termed illegal or 
perverse.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPELLANT:
7.	
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the Courts below 
erred in not granting maintenance ignoring the fact that the appellant 
is an illiterate lady having no source of income of her own and 
totally dependent upon her father and other family members. It 
was contended that there is nothing on the record to show that 
respondent no.2 was willing and ready to keep the appellant with 
him and the truth is that respondent no.2 had filed ‘divorce suits’ 
thrice before the ‘Sharia Court’.
8.	
It was further submitted that the Courts below erred in holding that 
the appellant was living separately without any reason ignoring the 
fact and evidence that she was turned out of the matrimonial house 
by the respondent no.2. It was argued that the appellant tried her 
best to live peacefully with the respondent no.2 and this fact is 
established by the compromise dated 22.11.2005. Learned counsel 
pointed out that the Courts below recorded a perverse finding that 
the appellant had admitted her wrongdoing/misbehaviour in the 
compromise dated 22.11.2005.
9.	
It was canvassed that the appellant categorically stated that she 
was turned out from the house by the respondent no.2 after being 
subjected to abuse, beating and cruelty to her, and the Courts below 
erroneously held that she is living separately without reasonable 
cause. The Courts below, submitted learned counsel, also fell in error 
in finding that as it was the second marriage of both parties, there 
was no possibility of dowry demand by respondent no.2, ignoring 
the evidence on record.
10.	 It was argued that both children have grown up now and the meagre 
amount of maintenance granted to them is insufficient today, while the 
salary and other income(s) of respondent no.2 have increased. On 
these grounds, learned counsel prayed for (a) allowing the appeal; 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1851
Shahjahan v. The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
(b) enhancing the maintenance to the children, and; (c) awarding 
maintenance to the appellant-wife.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE RESPONDENT NO.1-STATE:
11.	 Learned counsel for the State argued that vide the Impugned Order, 
maintenance was rightly allowed only to the children. Since the 
appellant is living separately from her husband without having any 
sufficient reason, therefore, findings recorded by the courts below 
cannot be termed to be without any basis. It was submitted that 
the appeal be dismissed.
RESPONDENT NO.2 IN ABSENTIA:
12.	 Despite finally being duly served,7 none appeared for the respondent 
no.2-husband. 
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION: 
13.	 We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and respondent no.1 
and carefully perused the material on record. The Family Court as 
well as the High Court denied the appellant’s claim for maintenance 
altogether and awarded a meagre sum totalling Rs.2,500/- (Rupees 
Two Thousand Five Hundred) as maintenance for the two children. 
Let us first examine the reason(s) assigned by the Courts below for 
non-suiting the appellant.
14.	 In her application for maintenance filed under Section 125 of the 
Code, the appellant contended that respondent no.2 had caused 
cruelty to her as she was not able to fulfil his demand for a motorcycle 
and Rs.50,000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand). On this aspect, the Family 
Court noted that since it was their second marriage, there is no 
possibility of demand of dowry by respondent no.2, as he would 
be trying to rehabilitate his house. Such reasoning/observation by 
the Family Court is unknown to the canons of law and is based 
on mere conjecture and surmise. The Family Court will do well, 
henceforth, to bear in mind the observation in Nagarathinam v 
State, through the Inspector of Police, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 
559 that the ‘…Court is not an institution to sermonise society on 
7	
Per the learned Registrar’s Order dated 15.05.2024.
1852
Supreme Court Reports
morality and ethics ...’. The Family Court could not have presumed 
that a second marriage for both parties would necessarily entail no 
dowry demand.
15.	 Further, the Family Court, taking note of the compromise deed dated 
22.11.2005, opined that it was the appellant’s character and conduct 
which led to the rift in the conjugal life of the parties. This reasoning 
is based on the purported fact that the appellant in the compromise 
deed had admitted to her mistake. However, from a bare perusal 
of the compromise deed, it would become apparent that it records 
no such admission. The first ‘divorce suit’ instituted by the husband 
in 2005 was dismissed on the basis of this compromise, wherein 
both parties decided to live together and agreed that they would 
not give the other party any occasion to complain. Hence, the very 
basis/reasoning for rejecting the appellant’s claim for maintenance 
appears to be ex-facie unsustainable. The Impugned Order has 
merely noted the findings returned by the Family Court with approval. 
16.	 The appellant, in her application before the Family Court, had claimed 
that the respondent no. 2 was serving on the post of Aarakshak in 
the Border Security Force and receiving around Rs.20,000/- (Rupees 
Twenty Thousand) per month as salary. The respondent no.2 on 
the other hand admitted in his evidence to receiving Rs.15,000/- 
(Rupees Fifteen Thousand) per month. It is to be borne in mind 
that this was the situation in 2008-2009 (nearly 16 years ago) and 
much water would have flown under the bridge since then. We are 
of the view that maintenance could not have been denied to the 
appellant-wife under the prevailing circumstances.
17.	 This brings us to the next question, i.e., from which date will the 
maintenance be payable – the date of the application or the date of 
the Order? The appellant has contested the direction of the Family 
Court wherein it has made the maintenance payable from the date 
of the order instead of the date of application. Of course, Section 
125(2) of the Code empowers the Court to award maintenance 
from the date of the order but the same has to be justified in the 
background of the attendant facts and circumstances and should 
not cause unnecessary hardship to the applicant. In our view, 
Section 125 of the Code is a beneficial piece of legislation which 
has been enacted to protect the wife and children from destitution 
and vagrancy and, in the usual course, it would not be appropriate 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1853
Shahjahan v. The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
to disadvantage the applicant for the delay in the disposal of the 
application by the judicial system. It would be beneficial to reproduce 
the relevant discussion in Rajnesh v Neha, (2021) 2 SCC 324, 
which is extracted hereunder: 
‘109. The judgments hereinabove reveal the divergent 
views of different High Courts on the date from which 
maintenance must be awarded. Even though a judicial 
discretion is conferred upon the court to grant 
maintenance either from the date of application or from 
the date of the order in Section 125(2) CrPC, it would 
be appropriate to grant maintenance from the date of 
application in all cases, including Section 125 CrPC. 
In the practical working of the provisions relating to 
maintenance, we find that there is significant delay in 
disposal of the applications for interim maintenance 
for years on end. It would therefore be in the interests 
of justice and fair play that maintenance is awarded 
from the date of the application.
110. In Shail Kumari Devi v. Krishan Bhagwan Pathak 
[Shail Kumari Devi v. Krishan Bhagwan Pathak, (2008) 
9 SCC 632: (2008) 3 SCC (Cri) 839], this Court held 
that the entitlement of maintenance should not be 
left to the uncertain date of disposal of the case. The 
enormous delay in disposal of proceedings justifies the 
award of maintenance from the date of application. In 
Bhuwan Mohan Singh v. Meena [Bhuwan Mohan Singh v. 
Meena, (2015) 6 SCC 353: (2015) 3 SCC (Civ) 321: 
(2015) 4 SCC (Cri) 200], this Court held that repetitive 
adjournments sought by the husband in that case resulted 
in delay of 9 years in the adjudication of the case. The 
delay in adjudication was not only against human rights, 
but also against the basic embodiment of dignity of an 
individual. The delay in the conduct of the proceedings 
would require grant of maintenance to date back to the 
date of application.
111. The rationale of granting maintenance from the 
date of application finds its roots in the object of 
enacting maintenance legislations, so as to enable the 
1854
Supreme Court Reports
wife to overcome the financial crunch which occurs 
on separation from the husband. Financial constraints 
of a dependent spouse hamper their capacity to be 
effectively represented before the court. In order to 
prevent a dependant from being reduced to destitution, 
it is necessary that maintenance is awarded from the 
date on which the application for maintenance is filed 
before the court concerned.
112. In Badshah v. Urmila Badshah Godse [Badshah v. 
Urmila Badshah Godse, (2014) 1 SCC 188: (2014) 1 
SCC (Civ) 51], the Supreme Court was considering 
the interpretation of Section 125 CrPC. The Court held: 
(SCC p. 196, para 13)
“13.3. … purposive interpretation needs to be 
given to the provisions of Section 125 CrPC. 
While dealing with the application of a 
destitute wife or hapless children or parents 
under this provision, the Court is dealing 
with the marginalised sections of the society. 
The purpose is to achieve “social justice” 
which is the constitutional vision, enshrined 
in the Preamble of the Constitution of India. 
The Preamble to the Constitution of India clearly 
signals that we have chosen the democratic 
path under the rule of law to achieve the goal 
of securing for all its citizens, justice, liberty, 
equality and fraternity. It specifically highlights 
achieving their social justice.  Therefore, it 
becomes the bounden duty of the courts 
to advance the cause of social justice. 
While giving interpretation to a particular 
provision, the court is supposed to bridge 
the gap between the law and society.”
(emphasis supplied)
113. It has therefore become necessary to issue directions 
to bring about uniformity and consistency in the orders 
passed by all courts, by directing that maintenance be 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1855
Shahjahan v. The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
awarded from the date on which the application was 
made before the court concerned. The right to claim 
maintenance must date back to the date of filing 
the application, since the period during which the 
maintenance proceedings remained pending is not 
within the control of the applicant.’
(emphasis supplied by bolding; underlining reflects 
emphasis supplied in original)
18.	 No doubt, Rajnesh (supra) was pronounced after the Family Court’s 
Order and Impugned Order were passed, but its enunciation of the law 
would entail that maintenance should be reckoned as awarded from 
the date of filing of the application in this behalf. Having regard to the 
totality of the facts and circumstances, we direct the respondent no.2 
to pay Rs.4,000/- (Rupees Four Thousand) per month as maintenance 
to the appellant, from the date of filing of the maintenance petition 
before the Family Court. The maintenance awarded to the children 
will also be payable from the date of filing of the maintenance 
petition before the Family Court. We take judicial notice that during 
the pendency of the appeal before this Court, the daughter Aatika 
has attained majority. Having due regard to the scheme of Section 
125 of the Code, it is clarified that the maintenance awarded in her 
favour will only be payable up to the date of her attaining majority. The 
entire amount of arrears shall be deposited by the respondent no.2 
in the Family Court within four months from today, after adjustment 
of amount(s), if any, already paid/deposited by him. 
19.	 Accordingly, the Order of the Family Court as well as the Impugned 
Order are set aside. The appeal is disposed of in the above terms.8
20.	 No order as to costs.
21.	 I.A. No.164654/2018 is allowed; exemption sought for is granted.
POST-SCRIPT:
22.	 In the opening portions of this Judgment, we have noted ‘Court 
of Kazi’, ‘Court of (Darul Kaja) Kajiyat’, ‘Sharia Court’ etcetera. In 
8	
Disposed of vide Order dated 04.02.2025. The present Judgment provides reasons for the same.
1856
Supreme Court Reports
Vishwa Lochan Madan v Union of India, (2014) 7 SCC 707, it 
was observed:
‘12. From the pleadings of the parties there does not seem 
to be any dispute that several Dar-ul-Qazas presided over 
by the Qazis exist and they do issue fatwas. In the present 
case, what we have been called upon to examine is as 
to whether Dar-ul-Qaza is a parallel court and “fatwa” 
has any legal status.
13. As it is well settled, the adjudication by a legal authority 
sanctioned by law is enforceable and binding and meant 
to be obeyed unless upset by an authority provided by law 
itself. The power to adjudicate must flow from a validly 
made law. A person deriving benefit from the adjudication 
must have the right to enforce it and the person required 
to make provision in terms of adjudication has to comply 
that and on its failure consequences as provided in law 
are to ensue. These are the fundamentals of any legal 
judicial system. In our opinion, the decisions of Dar-ul-
Qaza or the fatwa do not satisfy any of these requirements. 
Dar-ul-Qaza is neither created nor sanctioned by any law 
made by the competent legislature. Therefore, the opinion 
or the fatwa issued by Dar-ul-Qaza or for that matter 
anybody is not adjudication of dispute by an authority 
under a judicial system sanctioned by law. A Qazi or Mufti 
has no authority or powers to impose his opinion and 
enforce his fatwa on anyone by any coercive method. In 
fact, whatever may be the status of fatwa during Mogul 
or British Rule, it has no place in independent India under 
our constitutional scheme. It has no legal sanction and 
cannot be enforced by any legal process either by the 
Dar-ul-Qaza issuing that or the person concerned or for 
that matter anybody. The person or the body concerned 
may ignore it and it will not be necessary for anybody 
to challenge it before any court of law. It can simply be 
ignored. In case any person or body tries to impose it, 
their act would be illegal. Therefore, the grievance of 
the petitioner that Dar-ul-Qazas and Nizam-e-Qaza are 
running a parallel judicial system is misconceived.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1857
Shahjahan v. The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
14. As observed earlier, the fatwa has no legal status in 
our constitutional scheme. Notwithstanding that it is an 
admitted position that fatwas have been issued and are 
being issued. The All India Muslim Personal Law Board 
feels the “necessity of establishment of a network of judicial 
system throughout the country and Muslims should be 
made aware that they should get their disputes decided 
by the Qazis”. According to the All India Muslim Personal 
Law Board “this establishment may not have the police 
powers but shall have the book of Allah in hand and sunnat 
of the Rasool and all decisions should be according to 
the book and the sunnat. This will bring the Muslims to 
the Muslim courts. They will get justice”.
15. The object of establishment of such a court may be 
laudable but we have no doubt in our mind that it has 
no legal status. It is bereft of any legal pedigree and 
has no sanction in laws of the land. They are not part 
of the corpus juris of the State. A fatwa is an opinion, 
only an expert is expected to give. It is not a decree, nor 
binding on the court or the State or the individual. It is 
not sanctioned under our constitutional scheme. But this 
does not mean that existence of Dar-ul-Qaza or for that 
matter practice of issuing fatwas are themselves illegal. 
It is informal justice delivery system with an objective of 
bringing about amicable settlement between the parties. 
It is within the discretion of the persons concerned either 
to accept, ignore or reject it. However, as the fatwa gets 
strength from the religion; it causes serious psychological 
impact on the person intending not to abide by that. As 
projected by Respondent 10 “Godfearing Muslims obey 
the fatwas”. In the words of Respondent 10 “it is for the 
persons/parties who obtain fatwa to abide by it or not”. 
He, however, emphasises that “the persons who are 
Godfearing and believe that they are answerable to the 
Almighty and have to face the consequences of their 
doings/deeds, such are the persons, who submit to the 
fatwa”. Imrana’s case is an eye-opener in this context. 
Though she became the victim of lust of her father-in-law, 
her marriage was declared unlawful and the innocent 
1858
Supreme Court Reports
husband was restrained from keeping physical relationship 
with her. In this way a declaratory decree for dissolution of 
marriage and decree for perpetual injunction were passed. 
Though neither the wife nor the husband had approached 
for any opinion, an opinion was sought for and given at 
the instance of a journalist, a total stranger. In this way, 
the victim has been punished. A country governed by rule 
of law cannot fathom it.
16. In our opinion, one may not object to issuance of fatwa 
on a religious issue or any other issue so long it does not 
infringe upon the rights of individuals guaranteed under the 
law. Fatwa may be issued in respect of issues concerning 
the community at large at the instance of a stranger but if 
a fatwa is sought by a complete stranger on an issue not 
concerning the community at large but individual, then the 
Dar-ul-Qaza or for that matter anybody may consider the 
desirability of giving any response and while considering 
it should not be completely unmindful of the motivation 
behind the fatwa. Having regard to the fact that a fatwa 
has the potential of causing immense devastation, we 
feel impelled to add a word of caution. We would like to 
advise the Dar-ul-Qaza or for that matter anybody not to 
give any response or issue fatwa concerning an individual, 
unless asked for by the person involved or the person 
having direct interest in the matter. However, in a case 
the person involved or the person directly interested or 
likely to be affected being incapacitated, by any person 
having some interest in the matter. Issuance of fatwa 
on rights, status and obligation of individual Muslims, in 
our opinion, would not be permissible, unless asked for 
by the person concerned or in case of incapacity, by the 
person interested. Fatwas touching upon the rights of an 
individual at the instance of rank strangers may cause 
irreparable damage and therefore, would be absolutely 
uncalled for. It shall be in violation of basic human rights. 
It cannot be used to punish the innocent. No religion 
including Islam punishes the innocent. Religion cannot 
be allowed to be merciless to the victim. Faith cannot be 
used as the dehumanising force.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1859
Shahjahan v. The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
17.  In the light of what we have observed above, the 
prayer made by the petitioner in the terms sought for 
cannot be granted. However, we observe that no Dar-ul-
Qazas or for that matter, anybody or institution by any 
name, shall give verdict or issue fatwa touching upon the 
rights, status and obligation, of an individual unless such 
an individual has asked for it. In the case of incapacity of 
such an individual, any person interested in the welfare 
of such person may be permitted to represent the cause 
of individual concerned. In any event, the decision or the 
fatwa issued by whatever body being not emanating from 
any judicial system recognised by law, it is not binding on 
anyone including the person, who had asked for it. Further, 
such an adjudication or fatwa does not have a force of 
law and, therefore, cannot be enforced by any process 
using coercive method. Any person trying to enforce that 
by any method shall be illegal and has to be dealt with 
in accordance with law.’
(emphasis supplied)
23.	 ‘Court of Kazi’, ‘Court of (Darul Kaja) Kajiyat’, ‘Sharia Court’ etcetera 
by whatever name styled have no recognition in law. As noted in 
Vishwa Lochan Madan (supra), any declaration/decision by such 
bodies, by whatever name labelled, is not binding on anyone and 
is unenforceable by resort to any coercive measure. The only way 
such declaration/decision can withstand scrutiny in the eye of law 
could be when the affected parties accept such declaration/decision 
by acting thereon or accepting it and when such action does not 
conflict with any other law. Even then, such declaration/decision, 
at best, would only be valid inter-se the parties that choose to act 
upon/accept the same, and not a third-party. 
24.	 The position in law stands clarified as above.
A SETTLEMENT THAT WASN’T:
25.	 It appears that the appellant and respondent no.2 had agreed to 
a settlement before the District Legal Services Authority, Jhansi 
as per its Secretary’s letter dated 11.07.2024. Although the letter 
suggests that the prescribed settlement format was also signed by 
1860
Supreme Court Reports
both parties, the Special Lok Adalat held in this Court on 31.07.2024 
referred the matter back to Court recording ‘settlement seems not 
possible’.
26.	 As such, we have disposed of the appeal on the basis of the 
pleadings and arguments.
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain