[2025] 8 S.C.R. 568 : 2025 INSC 927
Narayan Yadav 
v. 
State of Chhattisgarh
(Criminal Appeal No. 3343 of 2025)
05 August 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala* and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court erred in passing the impugned judgment 
relying on the confessional FIR filed by the appellant-accused 
himself and the medical evidence to uphold his conviction, however, 
altering it from s.302, IPC to s.304 Part I.
Headnotes†
Evidence Act, 1872 – s.25 – Penal Code, 1860 – ss.302, 304  
Part I – Confessional FIR, not admissible in evidence – 
Appellant-accused himself lodged FIR confessing the murder 
of the deceased in a drunken quarrel after the deceased 
allegedly made an obscene remark about the appellant’s 
girlfriend – Convicted u/s.302, IPC – High Court relied on the 
confessional FIR and medical evidence to uphold conviction, 
however, it was altered from s.302, IPC to s.304 Part I, giving 
benefit of Exception 4 to s.300 – Sustainability:
Held: Not sustainable – Confessional FIR is not admissible in 
evidence – Contents of the FIR are hit by s.25, Evidence Act, being 
a confession before a police officer – An FIR of a confessional nature 
made by an accused person is inadmissible in evidence against 
him, except to the extent that it shows he made a statement soon 
after the offence, thereby identifying him as the maker of the report, 
which is admissible as evidence of his conduct u/s.8, Evidence Act – 
High Court erred in reading the contents of the FIR lodged by the 
appellant into evidence – There was no question at all for the High 
Court to seek corroboration of the medical evidence on record with 
the confessional part of the FIR lodged by the appellant – Further, 
the High Court should have been mindful of the fact that a doctor is 
not a witness of fact – Evidence of such an expert is of an advisory 
character – An accused cannot be held guilty of the offence of murder 
solely on the basis of medical evidence on record – Furthermore, the 
depositions of the panch witnesses do not inspire any confidence – 
* Author
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
569
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
Most of them turned hostile – No discovery of fact at the instance 
of the appellant, relevant and admissible u/s.27, Evidence Act, was 
established – Also, the High Court erred in invoking Exception 4 to 
s.300, IPC – Appellant acquitted. [Paras 24, 25, 28, 29, 52]
Penal Code, 1860 – Exception 4 to s.300 – When cannot be 
invoked – Discussed. [Paras 40-43, 48-50]
Evidence Act, 1872 – ss.27, 8 – Implication of – Conditions 
necessary for the applicability of s.27 – Discussed. [Paras 33, 36]
Evidence – Of expert witness – Nature – Advisory:
Held: An expert witness is examined by the prosecution because 
of his specialized knowledge on certain subjects, which the judge 
may not be fully equipped to assess – The evidence of such an 
expert is of an advisory character – The credibility of the expert 
witness depends on the reasons provided in support of his 
conclusions, as well as the data and material forming the basis 
of those conclusions. [Para 28]
Case Law Cited
Nisar Ali v. State of U.P. [1957] 1 SCR 657 : 1957 SCC OnLine SC 
42; Faddi v. State of M.P. [1964] 6 SCR 312 : 1964 SCC OnLine 
SC 123; Aghnoo Nagesia v. State of Bihar [1966] 1 SCR 134 : 
1965 SCC OnLine SC 109; Murli v. State of Rajasthan [2009] 13 
SCR 378 : (2009) 9 SCC 417; A. N. Venkatesh & Anr. v. State 
of Karnataka (2005) 7 SCC 714; State of Andhra Pradesh v. 
Rayavarapu Punnayya & Anr. [1977] 1 SCR 601 : (1976) 4 SCC 
382; Budhi Singh v. State of Himachal Pradesh [2012] 11 SCR 
848 : (2012) 13 SCC 663; Kikar Singh v. State of Rajasthan [1993] 
3 SCR 696 : (1993) 4 SCC 238; Surain Singh v. State of Punjab 
[2017] 2 SCR 824 : (2017) 5 SCC 796 – relied on.
List of Acts
Evidence Act, 1872; Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Confessional FIR; Confessional FIR not admissible in evidence; 
Conviction altered from Section 302, Penal Code, 1860 to Section 
304 Part I; Confession before a police officer; FIR of confessional 
nature made by accused; Confession made by accused before the 
police; Contents of the FIR hit by Section 25, Evidence Act, 1872; 
570
Supreme Court Reports
Murder; Obscene remark about girlfriend; Section 27, Evidence 
Act, 1872; Section 8, Evidence Act, 1872; Corroboration of medical 
evidence with the confessional part of the FIR; Doctor not a witness 
of fact; Expert Witness; Incorrect application of Exception 4 to 
Section 300, Penal Code, 1860; Panch witnesses turned hostile; 
Non-confessional FIR admissible against the accused.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
3343 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 16.01.2025 of the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in CRA No. 1538 of 2021
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
A Sirajudeen, Sr. Adv., Ms. Manjeet Chawla, Vishek Vats,  
Ms. Shaik Soni Ahamed, Ms. Kiran Bala Agarwal.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Ms. Sugandha Jain, Prabodh Kumar.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.B. Pardiwala, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the 
following parts:-
INDEX*
A.
FACTUAL MATRIX ........................................................................
2
B.
ANAYLYSIS ...................................................................................
6
a.	 Confessional FIR is not Admissible in Evidence ....................
7
b.	 Evidence of an Expert Witness is only Advisory in Nature ....
20
c.	
Implication of Section(s) 27 and 8 of the Act of 1872 ............
22
d.	 Incorrect application of Exception 4 to Section 300 of the IPC... 25
C.
CONCLUSION ................................................................................ 34
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
571
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High 
Court of Chhattisgarh in Criminal Appeal No. 1538 of 2021 dated 
16.01.2025 (hereinafter referred to as “Impugned Judgment”) 
by which the appeal preferred by the appellant herein against the 
judgment and order of conviction passed by the Trial Court came 
to be partly allowed by altering the conviction of the appellant 
herein from Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, 
“the IPC”) to Section 304 Part I of the IPC.
A.	
FACTUAL MATRIX
3.	
The appellant (original accused) himself lodged a First Information 
Report (FIR) dated 27.09.2019 with Korba Kotwali Police Station, 
District Korba, which came to be registered for the offence punishable 
under Section 302 of the IPC. The FIR reads thus:
“On 27.09.2019 I came to the P.S. Kotwali on the orders 
of Chowki Incharge for getting the Nalsi number in Crime 
No. 0/19 for the offence under Sections 302 and 380 IPC 
respectively. Nalsi number detailed that I am residing in 
the house of my relative Rajnath Yadav situated near 
the Pump House, Korba. I earn my livelihood as a milk 
supplier. I started work with Ram Babu Sharma, Thekedar 
past 15-20 days. Ram Babu Sharma used to call me for 
having drink at his house. Ram Baby invited me at his 
place on 24.09.2019. I went to his house at about 9.30 
PM situated at Parshuram Nagar. We both sat and drank. 
Meanwhile I showed my girlfriend’s pic from my mobile. 
Then he said that get your girlfriend at my place and leave 
her with me for one night. Hearing this quarrel started 
between us and we started to fight. Then I picked up a 
knife kept in his house for cutting vegetables and inflicted 
blows on his neck and stomach in anger and killed him by 
hitting a log of wood on his head, legs and private part. 
Thereafter I dragged his dead body near the bedside and 
covered it with a cloth that I took out from an almirah. Then 
I ransacked his room and took away his purse containing 
Rs. 7000 and keys of the Bolero car. I locked the room 
from outside and got the Bolero outside and locked the 
main door and ran towards Bilaspur in Bolero. I met with 
572
Supreme Court Reports
an accident at Raipur Road, ahead of Bilaspur. When 
I regained consciousness in morning I found myself in 
Saragaon Hospital where my mother and Yuvraj Yadu both 
were present. Today morning I came to Korba after getting 
discharged from the hospital. I informed about the incident 
to my mausa Rajnath Yadav, Rahul Chaudhari and Anuj 
Yadav and also informed the CSEB Chowki. Then I went 
to Ram Babu’s house with police people and pointed out 
the dead body. My vehicle is at the place of accident. I 
am filing the report. Investigation to be done.”
4.	
Upon registration of the FIR, lodged by the appellant himself, at 
the concerned Police Station referred to above, the investigation 
commenced. It appears that the investigating officer, after arresting 
the appellant, took him to the house of the deceased. After breaking 
open the house, the dead body of the deceased was found lying in 
a pool of blood inside his residence. A panchnama of the scene of 
offence was prepared in the presence of panch witnesses. The knife 
allegedly used by the appellant to inflict injuries on the deceased was 
recovered from the place of occurrence, i.e., the deceased’s house. 
The clothes and other articles were also collected in presence of the 
panch witnesses by preparing a panchnama, and were sent to the 
Forensic Science Laboratory for chemical analysis. The clothes of 
the appellant were discovered at his instance from the residence of 
his uncle, Rajnath Yadav, by drawing a panchnama.
5.	
The inquest panchnama of the dead body of the deceased was drawn 
in the presence of the panch witnesses. The body of the deceased 
was then sent for post-mortem examination. The post-mortem report 
Exhibit-PW 34 recorded the following injuries found on the body of 
the deceased:
“1. An incised wound was present on the right Side of 
his forehead measuring 6 X 2 cm, deep to the bone, in 
a vertical position.
2. An incised wound was present on the left side of his 
forehead, the size of which was 3 X 1 cm, deep to the 
bone, in a vertical position. 
3. An incised wound was present on the skin of the right 
parietal bone of the head, which was 4 X 2 cm, deep to 
the bone, in a vertical position. 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
573
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
4. An incised lesion was present on the skin of the left 
parietal bone, which was 5 X 2 cm in size, deep to the 
bone, in a vertical position, which was on the middle part 
of parietal bone. 
5. An incised wound was present on the anterior part of 
the abdomen at the iliac fossa part which was 4 X 2 X 2 
cm in size. 
6. An incised wound was present on the upper right side 
of the chest, below the clavicle bone, the size of which 
was 4 X 2 deep to the upper part of the lung.”
6.	
The cause of death, as stated in the post-mortem report and duly 
proved by Dr. R.K. Divya (PW-10), was shock resulting from excessive 
bleeding from the right side of the chest and injury to the upper lobe 
of the right lung.
7.	
Upon completion of the investigation, chargesheet came to be filed by 
the investigating officer, and the filing of chargesheet for the offence 
enumerated above culminated in the Sessions Case No. 9 of 2020.
8.	
The Sessions Judge, Korba, proceeded to frame charge against the 
appellant for the offences mentioned above. The appellant pleaded 
not guilty to the charge and claimed to be tried. In the course of trial, 
the prosecution examined the following witnesses:
i.	
PW-1, Rahul Kumar Chaudhari, panch witness (turned hostile);
ii.	
PW-2 Kamlesh Kumar, son of the deceased;
iii.	
PW-3 Ravishanker Sriniwas, panch witness;
iv.	
PW-4 Rampradeep Sharma, panch witness;
v.	
PW-5 Ramniwas Sharma, panch witness;
vi.	
PW-6 Jalashwar Sakar, panch witness;
vii.	 PW-7 B.R. Chaudhary, Police witness
viii.	 PW-8 Sudama Prasad, Police witness
ix.	
PW-9 Ashok Pandey, Police witness
x.	
PW-10 Dr. R.K. Divya, Medical Officer who performed post-
mortem
xi.	
PW-11 Hemant Patle, Police witness
574
Supreme Court Reports
9.	
The prosecution also adduced a few documentary evidence.
10.	 Upon completion of the recording of the oral evidence, further 
statement of the appellant was recorded under Section 313 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. In his statement, the appellant 
claimed that he had been falsely implicated in the alleged crime and 
asserted his complete innocence.
11.	 The Trial Court, upon overall appreciation of both oral as well as 
the documentary evidence on record, reached the conclusion that 
the prosecution had proved its case beyond reasonable doubt, and 
accordingly, it held the appellant guilty of the offence of murder and 
sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment.
12.	 The appellant being aggrieved by the judgment and order of 
conviction passed by the Trial Court, preferred an appeal before 
the High Court. The High Court partly allowed the appeal and 
altered the conviction of the appellant from Section 302 of the IPC 
to Section 304 Part I of the IPC, giving benefit of Exception 4 to 
Section 300 of the IPC
13.	 In such circumstances referred to above the appellant is before this 
Court with the present appeal.
B.	
ANAYLYSIS
14.	 Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and 
having gone through the materials on record the only question that 
falls for our consideration is whether the High Court committed any 
error in passing the Impugned Judgment.
15.	 The entire judgment of the High Court could be termed as erroneous 
on several grounds, there are errors apparent on the face of the 
Impugned Judgment. The first misstep was that the High Court 
examined the medical evidence on record in detail and then 
proceeded to directly corroborate it with the contents of the FIR 
lodged by the appellant himself. In doing so, the High Court fully 
convinced itself that the appellant’s statements in the form of a 
confession, as contained in the FIR, were entirely corroborated by 
the medical evidence. Consequently, the Court concluded that the 
appellant had committed the alleged crime. In arriving at such a 
conclusion, the High Court overlooked some fundamental principles 
of criminal jurisprudence.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
575
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
a.	
Confessional FIR is not Admissible in Evidence 
16.	 The FIR was exhibited in evidence (Exhibit P-14) through the oral 
evidence of the investigating officer PW-9, Ashok Pandey. PW-9 
proved his signature on the FIR and also identified the signature 
of the first informant i.e., the appellant-herein. However, the other 
contents of the FIR could not have been proved through the testimony 
of the investigating officer. A plain reading of the FIR indicates that it 
contains a confession by its maker i.e., the appellant-herein, regarding 
the commission of the alleged offence.
17.	 A statement in an FIR can normally be used only to contradict 
its maker as provided in Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 (for short, “the Act of 1872”), or to corroborate his evidence 
as envisaged in Section 157 of the Act of 1872. In a criminal trial, 
however, neither of these is possible as long as the maker of the 
statement is an accused in the case, unless he offers himself to be 
examined as a witness [See: Nisar Ali v. State of U.P., 1957 SCC 
OnLine SC 42]. J.L. Kapur, J. speaking for the three-Judge Bench 
in that decision has observed:
“A first information report is not a substantive piece 
of evidence and can only be used to corroborate the 
statement of the maker under Section 157, Evidence 
Act, or to contradict it under Section 145 of that Act. It 
cannot be used as evidence against the maker at the trial 
if he himself becomes an accused, nor to corroborate or 
contradict other witnesses. In this case, therefore, it is 
not evidence.”
(Emphasis supplied)
18.	 The High Court failed to take into consideration two landmark 
decisions of this Court – one in Faddi v. State of M.P., 1964 SCC 
OnLine SC 123, and the other in Aghnoo Nagesia v. State of 
Bihar, 1965 SCC OnLine SC 109.
19.	 In Faddi (supra), this Court stated that:
“If the FIR given by the accused contains any admission 
as defined in Section 17 of the Evidence Act there is no 
bar in using such an admission against the maker thereof 
as permitted under Section 21 of the Act, provided such 
576
Supreme Court Reports
admission is not inculpatory in character. In the judgment 
their Lordships distinguished Nisar Ali case [AIR 1957 SC 
366] in the following lines:
“But it appears to us that in the context in which the 
observation is made and in the circumstances, which 
we have verified from the record of that case, that the 
Sessions Judge had definitely held the first information 
report lodged by the co-accused who was acquitted 
to be inadmissible against Nisar Ali, and that the High 
Court did not refer to it at all in its judgment, this 
observation really refers to a first information report 
which is in the nature of a confession by the maker 
thereof. Of course, a confessional first information 
report cannot be used against the maker when he be 
an accused and necessarily cannot be used against 
a co-accused.”
(Emphasis supplied)
20.	 In Aghnoo Nagesia (supra), this Court sounded a note of caution 
that when the statement in the FIR given by an accused contains 
incriminating materials and it is difficult to sift the exculpatory portion 
therefrom, the whole of it must be excluded from evidence.
21.	 In Faddi (supra), the issue before this Court was whether the FIR 
lodged by the accused himself therein was admissible in evidence. 
In the facts of the said case, this Court held that the objection to the 
admissibility of the FIR lodged by the appellant was not sound, as the 
FIR only contained a few admissions, and those admissions did not 
amount to a confession so as to render the entire FIR inadmissible 
in evidence. We quote the relevant observations made by this Court 
in Faddi (supra) as under:
“14. It is contended for the appellant that the first information 
report was inadmissible in evidence and should not have 
been therefore taken on the record. In support, reliance 
is placed on the case reported as Nisar Ali v. State of U.P 
[AIR 1957 SC 366]. We have considered this contention 
and do not see any force in it.
15. The report is not a confession of the appellant. It 
is not a statement made to a police officer during the 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
577
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
course of investigation. Section 25 of the Evidence Act 
and Section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure do 
not bar its admissibility. The report is an admission by 
the accused of certain facts which have a bearing on 
the question to be determined by the Court viz. how 
and by whom the murder of Gulab was committed, or 
whether the appellant's statement in Court denying the 
correctness of certain statements' of the prosecution 
witnesses is correct or not. Admissions are admissible in 
evidence under Section 21 of the Act. Section 17 defines 
an admission to be a statement, oral or documentary, 
which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or 
relevant fact, and which is made by any of the persons, 
and under the circumstances, thereafter mentioned, in 
the Act. Section 21 provides that admissions are relevant 
and may be proved as against a person who makes 
them. Illustrations (c), (d) and (e) to Section 21 are of 
the circumstances in which an accused could prove his 
own admissions which go in his favour in view of the 
exceptions mentioned in Section  21 to the provision 
that admissions could not be proved by the person who 
makes them. It is therefore clear that admissions of an 
accused can be proved against him.
16. The Privy Council, in very similar circumstances, held 
long ago in Dal Singh v. King Emperor [LR 44 IA 137] such 
first information reports to be admissible in evidence. It 
was said in that case at p. 142:
“It is important to compare the story told by Dal 
Singh when making his statement at the trial with 
that what he said in the report he made to the police 
in the document which he signed, a document which 
is sufficiently authenticated. The report is clearly 
admissible. It was in no sense a confession. As 
appears from its terms, it was rather in the nature 
of an information or charge laid against Mohan and 
Jhunni in respect of the assault alleged to have 
been made on Dal Singh on his way from Hardua to 
Jubbulpur. As such the statement is proper evidence 
against him….
578
Supreme Court Reports
It will be observed that this statement is at several 
points at complete variance with what Dal Singh 
afterwards stated in Court. The Sessions Judge 
regarded the document as discrediting his defence. 
He had to decide between the story for the prosecution 
and that told for Dal Singh.”
Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the facts 
of that case were distinguishable in some respects from 
the facts of this case. Such a distinction, if any, has no 
bearing on the question of the admissibility of the report. 
The report was held admissible because it was not a 
confession and it was helpful in determining the matter 
before the Court.
17. In Nisar Ali case [AIR 1957 SC 366] Kapur, J. who 
spoke for the Court said, after narrating the facts:
“An objection has been taken to the admissibility 
of this report as it was made by a person who was 
a co-accused. A first information report is not a 
substantive piece of evidence and can only be used 
to corroborate the statement of the maker under 
Section 157, Evidence Act, or to contradict it under 
Section 145 of that Act. It cannot be used as evidence 
against the maker at the trial if he himself becomes 
an accused, not to corroborate or contradict other 
witnesses. In this case, therefore, it is not evidence.”
It is on these observations that it has been contended for 
the appellant that his report was inadmissible in evidence. 
Ostensibly, the expression ‘it cannot be used as evidence 
against the maker at the trial if he himself becomes an 
accused’ supports the appellant’s contention. But it appears 
to us that in the context in which the observation is made 
and in the circumstances, which we have verified from the 
record of that case, that the Sessions Judge had definitely 
held the first information report lodged by the co-accused 
who was acquitted to be inadmissible against Nisar Ali, and 
that the High Court did not refer to it at all in its judgment, 
this observation really refers to a first information report 
which is in the nature of a confession by the maker thereof. 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
579
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
Of course a confessional first information report cannot 
be used against the maker when he be an accused and 
necessarily cannot be used against a co-accused. Further, 
the last sentence of the above-quoted observation is 
significant and indicates what the Court meant was that 
the first information report lodged by Qudratullah, the co-
accused, was not evidence against Nisar Ali. This Court 
did not mean — as it had not to determine in that case — 
that a first information report which is not a confession 
cannot be used as an admission under Section 21 of the 
Evidence Act or as a relevant statement under any other 
provisions of that Act. We find also that this observation 
has been understood in this way by the Rajasthan High 
Court in State v. Balchand [AIR 1960 Raj 101] and in State 
of Rajasthan v. Shiv Singh [AIR 1962 Raj 3] and by the 
Allahabad High Court in Allahdia v. State [1959 All LJ 340] .
18. We therefore hold that the objection to the admissibility 
of the first information report lodged by the appellant is not 
sound and that the Courts below have rightly admitted it 
in evidence and have made proper use of it.”
(Emphasis supplied)
22.	 We now proceed to look into the decision of this Court in Aghnoo 
Nagesia (supra). The following observations of this Court at 
paragraphs 9 to 18 are relevant and are quoted below:- 
“9. Section 25 of the Evidence Act is one of the provisions 
of law dealing with confessions made by an accused. 
The law relating to confessions is to be found generally 
in Ss. 24 to 30 of the Evidence Act and Ss. 162 and 164 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. Sections 17 to 
31 of the Evidence Act are to be found under the heading 
“Admissions”. Confession is a species of admission, 
and is dealt with in Ss. 24 to 30. A confession or an 
admission is evidence against the maker of it, unless its 
admissibility is excluded by some provision of law. Section 
24 excludes confession caused by certain inducements, 
threats and promises. Section 25 provides: “No confession 
made to a police officer shall be proved as against a 
580
Supreme Court Reports
person accused of an offence”. The terms of S. 25 are 
imperative. A confession made to a police officer under 
any circumstances is not admissible in evidence against 
the accused. It covers a confession made when he was 
free and not in police custody, as also a confession made 
before any investigation has begun. The expression 
“accused of any offence” covers a person accused of 
an offence at the trial whether or not he was accused of 
the offence when he made the confession. Section 26 
prohibits proof against any person of a confession made 
by him in the custody of a police officer, unless it is made 
in the immediate presence of a Magistrate. The partial 
ban imposed by S. 26 relates to a confession made to 
a person other than a police officer. Section 26 does not 
qualify the absolute ban imposed by S. 25 on a confession 
made to a police officer. Section 27 is in the form of a 
proviso, and partially lifts the ban imposed by Ss. 24, 
25 and 26.It provides that when any fact is deposed to 
as discovered in consequence of information received 
from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of 
a police officer, so much of such information, whether it 
amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to 
the fact thereby discovered, may be proved. Section 162 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure forbids the use of any 
statement made by any person to a police officer in the 
course of an investigation for any purpose at any enquiry 
or trial in respect of the offence under investigation, save 
as mentioned in the proviso and in cases falling under 
sub-s. (2), and it specifically provides that nothing in it 
shall be deemed to affect the provisions of S. 27 of the 
Evidence Act. The words of S. 162 are wide enough to 
include a confession made to a police officer in the course 
of an investigation. A statement or confession made in the 
course of an investigation may be recorded by a Magistrate 
under S. 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure subject 
to the safeguards imposed by the section. Thus, except 
as provided by S. 27 of the Evidence Act, a confession 
by an accused to a police officer is absolutely protected 
under S. 25 of the Evidence Act, and if it is made in the 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
581
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
course of an investigation, it is also protected by S. 162 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and a confession to 
any other person made by him while in the custody of a 
police officer is protected by S. 26, unless it is made in 
the immediate presence of a Magistrate. These provisions 
seem to proceed upon the view that confessions made by 
an accused to a police officer or made by him while he 
is in the custody of a police officer are not to be trusted, 
and should not be used in evidence against him. They are 
based upon grounds of public policy and the fullest effect 
should be given to them. 
10. Section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides 
for the recording of the first information. The information 
report as such is not substantive evidence. It may be used 
to corroborate the informant under S. 157 of the Evidence 
Act or to contradict him under S. 145 of the Act, if the 
informant is called as a witness. If the first information is 
given by the accused himself, the fact of his giving the 
information is admissible against him as evidence of his 
conduct under S. 8 of the Evidence Act. If the information 
is a non-confessional statement, it is admissible against the 
accused as an admission under S. 21 of the Evidence Act 
and is relevant, see Faddi v. State of Madhya Pradesh, Cri. 
Appeal No. 210 of 1963, dated 24-1-1964: (AIR 1964 SC 
1850), explaining Nisar Ali v. State of U. P., (S) AIR 1957 
SC 366 and Dal Singh v. King Emperor, 44 Ind App 137: 
(AIR 1917 PC 25). But a confessional first information report 
to a police Officer cannot be used against the accused in 
view of S. 25 of the Evidence Act. 
11. The Indian Evidence Act does not define “confession”. 
For a long time, the Courts in India adopted the definition 
of “confession” given in Art. 22 of Stephen’s Digest of the 
Law of Evidence. According to that definition a confession 
is an admission made at any time by a person charged 
with crime, stating or suggesting the inference that he 
committed that crime. This definition was discarded by the 
Judicial Committee in Pakala Narayanaswami v. Emperor, 
66 Ind App 66 at p. 81: (AIR 1939 PC 47 at p. 52). Lord 
Atkin observed: 
582
Supreme Court Reports
“.......no statement that contains self exculpatory 
matter can amount to confession, if the exculpatory 
statement is of some fact which if true would negative 
the offence alleged to be confessed. Moreover, a 
confession must either admit in terms the offence, or 
at any rate substantially all the facts which constitute 
the offence. An admission of a gravely incriminating 
fact, even a conclusively incriminating fact, is not 
of itself a confession, e.g., an admission that the 
accused is the owner of and was in recent possession 
of the knife or revolver which caused a death with no 
explanation of any other man’s possession.” These 
observations received the approval of this Court in 
Palvinder Kaur v. State of Punjab (1), 1953 SCR 94 
at p. 104; (AIR 1952 SC 354 at p. 357). In State of 
U. P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya, (1961) 1 SCR 14 at p. 
21: (AIR 1960 SC 1125 at pp. 1128-1129). Shah, J., 
referred to a confession as a statement made by a 
person stating or suggesting the inference that he 
has committed a crime. 
12. Shortly put, a confession may be defined as an 
admission of the offence by a person charged with the 
offence. A statement which contains self-exculpatory 
matter cannot amount to a confession, if the exculpatory 
statement is of some fact which, if true, would negative 
the offence alleged to be confessed. If an admission of an 
accused is to be used against him, the whole of it should 
be tendered in evidence and if part of the admission is 
exculpatory and part inculpatory, the prosecution is not 
at liberty to use in evidence the inculpatory part only. 
See Hanumant Govind v. State of M. P. 1952 SCR 1091 
at p. 1111: (AIR 1952 SC 343 at p. 350) and 1953 SCR 
94 : (AIR 1952 SC 354). The accused is entitled to insist 
that the entire admission including the exculpatory part 
must be tendered in evidence. But this principle is of no 
assistance to the accused where no part of his statement 
is self-exculpatory; and the prosecution intends to use the 
whole of the statement against the accused. 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
583
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
13. Now, a confession may consist of several parts and 
may reveal not only the actual commission of the crime 
but also the motive, the preparation, the opportunity, 
the provocation, the weapons used, the intention, the 
concealment of the weapon and the subsequent conduct of 
the accused. If the confession is tainted the taint attaches 
to each part of it. It is not permissible in law to separate 
one part and to admit it in evidence as a non-confessional 
statement. Each part discloses some incriminating fact, 
i.e., some fact which by itself or along with other admitted 
or proved facts suggests the inference that the accused 
committed the crime, and though each part taken singly 
may not amount to a confession, each of them being part 
of a confessional statement partakes of the character 
of a confession. If a statement contains an admission 
of an offence, not only that admission but also every 
other admission of an incriminating fact contained in the 
statement is part of the confession. 
14. If proof of the confession is excluded by any provision 
of law such as S.24, S. 25 and S. 26 of the Evidence Act, 
the entire confessional statement in all its parts including 
the admissions of minor incriminating facts must also be 
excluded, unless proof of it is permitted by some other 
section under as S. 27 of the Evidence Act. Little substance 
and content would be left in Ss. 24, 25 and 26 if proof of 
admission of incriminating facts in a confessional statement 
is permitted. 
15. Sometimes, a single sentence in a statement may not 
amount to a confession at all. Take a case of a person 
charged under S. 301-A of the Indian Penal Code and 
a statement made by him to a police officer that “I was 
drunk: I was driving a car at a speed of 80 miles per 
hour. I could see A on the road at a distance of 80 yards; 
I did not blow the horn: I made no attempt to stop the 
car; the car knocked down A”. No single sentence in this 
statement amounts to a confession; but the statement 
read as a whole amounts to a confession of an offence 
under S. 304-A of the Indian Penal Code, and it would 
not be permissible to admit in evidence each sentence 
584
Supreme Court Reports
separately as a nonconfessional statement. Again, take a 
case where a single sentence in a statement amounts to 
an admission of an offence. ‘A’ states “I struck ‘B’ with a 
tangi and hurt him”. In consequence of the injury ‘B’ died. 
‘A’ committed an offence and is chargeable under various 
sections of the Indian Penal Code. Unless he brings his 
case within one of the recognised exceptions, his statement 
amounts to an admission of an offence, but the other parts 
of the statement such as the motive, the preparation, the 
absence of provocation, concealment of the weapon and 
the subsequent conduct, all throw light upon the gravity of 
the offence and the intention and knowledge of the accused, 
and negatives the right of private defence, accident and 
other possible defences. Each and every admission of an 
incriminating fact contained in the confessional statement 
is part of the confession. 
16. If the confession is caused by an inducement, threat 
or promise as contemplated by S. 24 of the Evidence 
Act, the whole of the confession is excluded by S. 24. 
Proof of not only the admission of the offence but also 
the admission of every other incriminating fact such as 
the motive, the preparation and the subsequent conduct is 
excluded by S. 24. To hold that the proof of the admission 
of other incriminating facts is not barred by S. 24 is to rob 
the section of its practical utility and content. It may be 
suggested that the bar of S. 24 does not apply to the other 
admissions, but though receivable in evidence, they are of 
no weight, as they were caused by inducement, threat or 
promise. According to this suggestion, the other admissions 
are relevant but are of no value. But we think that on a 
plain construction of S. 24, proof of all the admissions of 
incriminating facts contained in a confessional statement 
is excluded by the section. Similarly, Ss. 25 and 26 bar not 
only proof of admission of an offence by an accused to a 
police officer or made by him while in the custody of a police 
officer but also admissions contained in the confessional 
statement of all incriminating facts related to the offence. 
17. A little reflection will show that the expression 
“confession” in Ss. 24 to 30 refers to the confessional 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
585
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
statement as a whole including not only the admissions of 
the offence but also all other admissions of incriminating 
facts related to the offence. Section 27 partially lifts the 
ban imposed by Ss. 24, 25 and 26 in respect of so much 
of the information whether it amounts to a confession 
or not, as relates distinctly to the fact discovered in 
consequence of the information, if the other conditions of 
the section are satisfied. Section 27 distinctly contemplates 
that an information leading to a discovery may be a part 
of the confession of the accused and thus fall within the 
purview of Ss. 24, 25 and 26. Section 27 thus shows that 
a confessional statement admitting the offence may contain 
additional information as part of the confession. Again, S. 
30 permits the Court to take into consideration against a 
co-accused a confession of another accused affecting not 
only himself but the other co-accused. Section 30 thus 
shows that matters affecting other persons may form part 
of the confession. 
18. If the first information report is given by the accused to 
a police officer and amounts to a confessional statement, 
proof of the confession is prohibited by S. 25. The 
confession includes not only the admission of the offence 
but all other admissions of incriminating facts related to the 
offence contained in the confessional statement. No part 
of the confessional statement is receivable in evidence 
except to the extent that the ban of S. 25 is lifted by S. 27.”
(Emphasis supplied)
23.	 The legal position, therefore, is this – a statement contained in the FIR 
furnished by one of the accused in the case cannot, in any manner, 
be used against another accused. Even as against the accused who 
made it, the statement cannot be used if it is inculpatory in nature 
nor can it be used for the purpose of corroboration or contradiction 
unless its maker offers himself as a witness in the trial. The very 
limited use of it is, as an admission under Section 21 of the Act of 
1872, against its maker alone, and only if the admission does not 
amount to a confession.
24.	 To put the aforesaid in simpler terms, an FIR of a confessional nature 
made by an accused person is inadmissible in evidence against him, 
586
Supreme Court Reports
except to the extent that it shows he made a statement soon after the 
offence, thereby identifying him as the maker of the report, which is 
admissible as evidence of his conduct under Section 8 of the Act of 
1872. Additionally, any information furnished by him that leads to the 
discovery of a fact is admissible under Section 27 of the Act of 1872. 
However, a non-confessional FIR is admissible against the accused 
as an admission under Section 21 of the Act of 1872 and is relevant.
25.	 Thus, the first error that the High Court committed was to read the 
contents of the FIR lodged by the appellant into evidence. As observed 
earlier, the FIR lodged by the appellant amounts to a confession, 
and any confession made by an accused before the police is hit by 
Section 25 of the Act of 1872. There was no question at all for the 
High Court to seek corroboration of the medical evidence on record 
with the confessional part of the FIR lodged by the appellant. 
26.	 Once we say that the contents of the FIR are hit by Section 25 of 
the Act of 1872, being a confession before a police officer, the only 
remaining evidence on record is the medical evidence and the oral 
evidence of the panch witnesses.
b.	
Evidence of an Expert Witness is only Advisory in Nature 
27.	 At this stage, we may look into some curious findings recorded by 
the High Court in its Impugned Judgement. We quote the relevant 
paragraphs as under:
“16. Now, the next question for consideration would be 
whether the accused/appellant herein is the perpetrator 
of the crime in question, which the learned trial Court has 
recorded in affirmative by relying upon the testimony of 
Dr. R.K. Divya (PW-10), who conducted post-mortem had 
opined that the cause of death is shock due to right side 
of haemothorax due to laceration of apex lobe of right lung 
secondary to incised wound over upper part of right side 
of front of chest. The Doctor ultimately opined through his 
report the nature of death to be homicidal. Thus, on the 
basis of testimony of Dr R.K. Divya (PW-10), it is clear that 
it is the appellant herein who on the fateful date and time 
has caused grievous injuries to the deceased, due to which 
he died. As such, the learned trial Court has rightly held 
that it is the appellant/accused who has caused injuries 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
587
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
over the body of the deceased and caused his death. 
Accordingly, we hereby affirm the said finding.
26. Conviction of the appellant is based on the evidence of 
Dr. R.K. Divya (PW-10), who has conducted postmortem on 
the body of deceased, vide Ex.P/34 and he found following 
injuries on the dead body of the deceased. 
27. According to Dr. R.K. Divya (PW-10). the cause of death 
of deceased is shock due to right side of haemothorax 
due to laceration of apex lobe of right lung secondary 
to incised wound over upper part of right side of front of 
chest and nature of death was homicidal. It has been also 
opined by the concerned Doctor that the injury caused to 
the deceased has been by the sharp edged weapon and 
the same may be caused by knife.
28. Reverting to the facts of the present case, in light 
of principles of law laid down by their Lordships of the 
Supreme Court in the above stated judgments, it is 
quite vivid that the appellant himself has lodged a First 
Information Report alleging that, on the date of incident, 
some quarrel took place between the appellant and the 
deceased on the ground of showing the photograph of his 
girlfriend to the deceased and the deceased stated to bring 
his girlfriend and left her with him for one night, then out of 
anger and on sudden quarrel, the appellant assaulted the 
deceased with a knife on his chest, by which, he received 
grievous injury and died on the same day of the incident on 
account of excessive bleeding due to injury on his chest. It 
further appears from the fact on record that appellant after 
committing the crime in question, has lodged the report 
and upon his memorandum some incriminating articles 
have been recovered from his instance and upon further 
investigation, second memorandum has been recorded, by 
which, his clothes were recorded. It is apparent that though 
there was no premeditation on the part of the appellant to 
cause death of deceased, but he had given false version.”
28.	 The High Court should have been mindful of the fact that a doctor 
is not a witness of fact. A doctor is examined by the prosecution 
as a medical expert for the purpose of proving the contents of the 
588
Supreme Court Reports
post-mortem report and the medical certificates on record, if any. 
An expert witness is examined by the prosecution because of his 
specialized knowledge on certain subjects, which the judge may not 
be fully equipped to assess. The evidence of such an expert is of an 
advisory character. The credibility of the expert witness depends on 
the reasons provided in support of his conclusions, as well as the 
data and material forming the basis of those conclusions. An accused 
cannot be held guilty of the offence of murder solely on the basis 
of medical evidence on record. So far as the panch witnesses are 
concerned their depositions do not inspire any confidence.
29.	 Most of the panch witnesses turned hostile. If at all, the public 
prosecutor wanted to prove the contents of the panchnamas after the 
panch witnesses turned hostile, he could have done so through the 
evidence of the investigating officer. However, the investigating officer 
also failed to prove the contents of the panchnamas in accordance 
with law. Thus, there is nothing on record by way of evidence relating 
to any discovery of fact is concerned. In other words, no discovery of 
fact at the instance of the appellant, relevant and admissible under 
Section 27 of the Act of 1872, has been established.
c.	
Implication of Section(s) 27 and 8 of the Act of 1872 
30.	 The learned counsel appearing for the State, strenuously urged 
before us to take into consideration the conduct of the appellant 
which, according to him, is relevant under Section 8 of the Act of 
1872. He led stress on the following circumstances:
i.	
The appellant himself went to police station and lodged the FIR;
ii.	
While, at the scene of offence panchnama was being drawn, 
appellant pointed out that the body of the deceased was lying 
in between the two walls inside the house of the deceased; 
iii.	
The appellant led the Investigating Officer and the panchnama 
witnesses to the house of his uncle, Rajnath Yadav, and pointed 
out the place where he had kept his clothes worn at the time 
of the incident.
iv.	
A bloodstain was also found on the shirt of the appellant, 
however, the learned counsel fairly conceded that there is 
nothing to indicate that the bloodstain matched with the blood 
group of the deceased.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
589
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
31.	 The first and most fundamental flaw in the testimony of all the 
aforementioned prosecution witnesses is that none of them have 
specifically deposed to the exact statement allegedly made by the 
appellant, which purportedly led to the discovery of a fact relevant 
under Section 27 of the Act of 1872. 
32.	 Section 27 of the Act of 1872 reads thus: 
“27. How much of information received from accused may 
be proved.––Provided that, when any fact is deposed to 
as discovered inconsequence of information received 
from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of 
a police-officer, so much of such information, whether it 
amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the 
fact thereby discovered, may be proved.”
33.	 The conditions necessary for the applicability of Section 27 of the 
Act of 1872 are:
i.	
That consequent to the information given by the accused, it led 
to the discovery of some fact; 
ii.	
The fact discovered must be one which was not within the 
knowledge of the police and the knowledge of the fact for the 
first time was derived from the information given by the accused; 
iii.	
The discovery of a fact which is the direct outcome of such 
information; 
iv.	
Only such portion of the information as connected with the said 
discovery is admissible; 
v.	
The discovery of the fact must relate to the commission of 
some offence. 
34.	 In the aforesaid context, we may refer to and rely upon the decision 
of this Court in Murli v. State of Rajasthan, reported in (2009) 9 
SCC 417, which held that the contents of the panchnama are not 
the substantive piece of evidence. It reads thus; 
“34. The contents of the panchnama are not the substantive 
evidence. The law is settled on that issue. What is 
substantive evidence is what has been stated by the 
panchas or the person concerned in the witness box.[…]”
(Emphasis supplied)
590
Supreme Court Reports
35.	 In the aforesaid context, our attention was drawn to a decision of this 
Court in the case of A. N. Venkatesh & Anr. v. State of Karnataka, 
reported in (2005) 7 SCC 714, which states thus: 
“9. By virtue of Section 8 of the Evidence Act, the conduct 
of the accused person is relevant, if such conduct 
influences or is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant 
fact. The evidence of the circumstance, simpliciter, that 
the accused pointed out to the police officer, the place 
where the dead body of the kidnapped boy was found 
and on their pointing out the body was exhumed, would 
be admissible as conduct under Section 8 irrespective 
of the fact whether the statement made by the accused 
contemporaneously with or antecedent to such conduct 
falls within the purview of Section 27 or not as held by this 
Court in Prakash Chand v. State (UT of Delhi) [Prakash 
Chand v. State (UT of Delhi), (1979) 3 SCC 90 : 1979 SCC 
(Cri) 656] . Even if we hold that the disclosure statement 
made by the appellant-accused (Exts. P-15 and P-16) is 
not admissible under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, still 
it is relevant under Section 8.”
(Emphasis supplied)
36.	 In this context, we deem it necessary to sound a note of caution. 
While the conduct of an accused may be a relevant fact under Section 
8 of the Act of 1872, it cannot, by itself, serve as the sole basis for 
conviction, especially in a grave charge such as murder. Like any other 
piece of evidence, the conduct of the accused is merely one of the 
circumstances the court may consider, in conjunction with other direct 
or circumstantial evidence on record. To put it succinctly, although 
relevant, the accused’s conduct alone cannot justify a conviction in 
the absence of cogent and credible supporting evidence.
d.	
Incorrect application of Exception 4 to Section 300 of the IPC
37.	 We could have concluded the judgment at this stage by allowing the 
appeal and thereby acquitting the appellant of all the charges against 
him. However, we consider it necessary to make certain observations 
regarding Exception 4 to Section 300 of the IPC. We wish to explain 
why the High Court could not have invoked Exception 4 to Section 
300 of the IPC and altered the conviction from Section 302 to 304 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
591
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
Part I of the IPC. Had there been any other oral or documentary 
evidence on record connecting the appellant herein with the alleged 
crime, we would have dismissed his appeal. Even while dismissing 
his appeal and holding him guilty of the offence of murder, we would 
not have been in a position to interfere with the erroneous application 
of Exception 4, as there is no appeal at the instance of the State 
challenging the acquittal under Section 302 of the IPC. Nevertheless, 
it is necessary to explain why the High Court committed an error 
in bringing the case within Exception 4 of Section 300 of the IPC.
38.	 Section 299 of the IPC explains culpable homicide as, causing death 
by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention 
of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the 
knowledge that the act complained of is likely to cause death. The first 
two categories require the intention to cause death, or the likelihood of 
causing death. While, the third category confines itself to the knowledge 
that the act complained of is likely to cause death. On the facts of this 
case, the offence of culpable homicide is clearly made out.
39.	 Section 300 of the IPC explains murder and it provides that culpable 
homicide is murder if, the act by which the death is caused is done 
with the intention of causing death, or the act complained of is so 
imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death, 
or “such bodily injury as is likely to cause death”. There are some 
exceptions when culpable homicide is not murder and we are 
concerned with Exception 4 which reads: 
“Exception 4. - Culpable homicide is not murder if it is 
committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the 
heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the 
offender having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel 
or unusual manner.” Explanation. - It is immaterial in such 
cases which party offers the provocation or commits the 
first assault.”
40.	 Exception 4 to Section 300 of the IPC applies in the absence of 
any premeditation. This is very clear from the words used in the 
provision itself. It contemplates that the sudden fight must occur in 
the heat of passion, or upon a sudden quarrel. The Exception deals 
with a case of provocation not covered by Exception 1, although it 
would have been more appropriately placed after that exception. It 
is founded upon the same principle, as both involve the absence of 
592
Supreme Court Reports
premeditation. However, while Exception 1 involves total deprivation 
of self-control, Exception 4 refers to that heat of passion which clouds 
a person’s sober reason and urges them to commit acts they would 
not otherwise commit. There is provocation in Exception 4, as there 
is in Exception 1, but the injury caused is not the direct consequence 
of that provocation. In fact, Exception 4 addresses cases where, 
notwithstanding that a blow may have been struck or provocation 
given at the outset of the dispute, regardless of how the quarrel 
originated, yet the subsequent conduct of both parties’ places them 
on an equal footing with respect to guilt.
41.	 A “sudden fight” implies mutual provocation and the exchange of 
blows on both sides. In such cases, the homicide committed is 
clearly not attributable to unilateral provocation, nor can the entire 
blame be placed on one side. If it were, Exception 1 would be the 
more appropriate provision. There is no prior deliberation or intention 
to fight; the fight breaks out suddenly, and both parties are more 
or less to blame. One party may have initiated it, but had the other 
not aggravated the situation by their own conduct, it may not have 
escalated to such a serious level. In such scenarios, there is mutual 
provocation and aggravation, making it difficult to determine the 
precise share of blame attributable to each participant. The protection 
of Exception 4 may be invoked if death is caused: (a)  without 
premeditation; (b) in a sudden fight; (c) without the offender having 
taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner; 
and (d) the fight must have been with the deceased.
42.	 To bring a case within Exception 4, all the ingredients mentioned 
therein must be satisfied. It is important to note that the term “fight” 
occurring in Exception 4 to Section 300 of the IPC is not defined 
in the IPC. A fight necessarily involves two parties – it takes two to 
make a fight. The heat of passion requires that there must be no 
time for the passions to cool, and in such case, the parties may have 
worked themselves into a fury due to a prior verbal altercation. A 
fight is a combat between two and more persons, whether with or 
without weapons. It is not possible to enunciate any general rule as 
to what constitutes a “sudden quarrel”. This is a question of fact, and 
whether a quarrel is sudden or not must necessarily depend upon 
the proved facts of each case. For the application of Exception 4, 
it is not enough to show that there was a sudden quarrel and no 
premeditation. It must also be shown that the offender did not take 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
593
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
undue advantage or act in a cruel or unusual manner. The expression 
“undue advantage” as used in the provision means “unfair advantage”.
43.	 From the above conspectus, it emerges that whenever a court is 
confronted with the question whether the offence is “murder” or 
“culpable homicide not amounting to murder”, it will be convenient 
to approach the problem in three stages. The question to be 
considered at the first stage is, whether the accused committed an 
act which caused the death of another person. Proof of a causal 
connection between the act of the accused and the resulting death 
leads to the second stage, for considering whether that act of the 
accused amounts to “culpable homicide” as defined in Section 299 
of the IPC. If the answer to this question is, prima facie, found in 
the affirmative, the next stage involves considering the application 
of Section 300 of the IPC. At this stage, the court must determine 
whether the facts proved by the prosecution bring the case within 
the ambit of any of the four clauses of the definition of “murder” 
contained in Section 300. If the answer to this is in the negative, 
the offence would be “culpable homicide not amounting to murder”, 
punishable under either the first or the second part of Section 304, 
depending respectively on whether the second or the third clause of 
Section 299 is applicable. However, if the answer is in the positive, 
but the case falls within any of the exceptions enumerated in Section 
300, the offence would still be “culpable homicide not amounting 
to murder”, punishable under the Part I of Section 304 of the IPC.
44.	 In State of Andhra Pradesh v. Rayavarapu Punnayya & Anr., 
reported in (1976) 4 SCC 382, this Court, while drawing a distinction 
between Section 302 and Section 304, held as under:- 
“12. In the scheme of the Penal Code, “culpable homicide” 
is genus and “murder” its specie. All “murder” is “culpable 
homicide” but not vice- versa. Speaking generally, “culpable 
homicide” sans “special characteristics of murder”, is 
“culpable homicide not amounting to murder”. For the 
purpose of fixing punishment, proportionate to the gravity 
of this generic offence, the Code practically recognises 
three degrees of culpable homicide. The first is, what 
may be called, “culpable homicide of the first degree”. 
This is the greatest form of culpable homicide, which is 
defined in Section 300 as “murder”. The second may be 
594
Supreme Court Reports
termed as “culpable homicide of the second degree”. This 
is punishable under the first part of Section 304. Then, 
there is “culpable homicide of the third degree”. This is 
the lowest type of culpable homicide and the punishment 
provided for it is, also, the lowest among the punishments 
provided for the three grades. Culpable homicide of this 
degree is punishable under the second part of Section 304.”
(Emphasis supplied)
45.	 In Budhi Singh v. State of Himachal Pradesh, reported in (2012) 
13 SCC 663, this Court has held as under:- 
“18. The doctrine of sudden and grave provocation is 
incapable of rigid construction leading to or stating any 
principle of universal application. This will always have to 
depend on the facts of a given case. While applying this 
principle, the primary obligation of the court is to examine 
from the point of view of a person of reasonable prudence 
if there was such grave and sudden provocation so as to 
reasonably conclude that it was possible to commit the 
offence of culpable homicide, and as per the facts, was 
not a culpable homicide amounting to murder. An offence 
resulting from grave and sudden provocation would 
normally mean that a person placed in such circumstances 
could lose selfcontrol but only temporarily and that too, 
in proximity to the time of provocation. The provocation 
could be an act or series of acts done by the deceased 
to the accused resulting in inflicting of injury. Another test 
that is applied more often than not is that the behaviour 
of the assailant was that of a reasonable person. A fine 
distinction has to be kept in mind between sudden and 
grave provocation resulting in sudden and temporary 
loss of selfcontrol and the one which inspires an actual 
intention to kill. Such act should have been done during 
the continuation of the state of mind and the time for such 
person to kill and reasons to regain the dominion over the 
mind. Once there is premeditated act with the intention 
to kill, it will obviously fall beyond the scope of culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder.....”
(Emphasis supplied)
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
595
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
46.	 In the case of Kikar Singh v. State of Rajasthan, reported in (1993) 
4 SCC 238, this Court held as under:- 
“8. The counsel attempted to bring the case within Exception 
4. For its application all the conditions enumerated therein 
must be satisfied. The act must be committed without 
premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion; (2) 
upon a sudden quarrel; (3) without the offender’s having 
taken undue advantage; (4) and the accused had not acted 
in a cruel or unusual manner. Therefore, there must be a 
mutual combat or exchanging blows on each other. And 
however slight the first blow, or provocation, every fresh 
blow becomes a fresh provocation. The blood is already 
heated or warms up at every subsequent stroke. The 
voice of reason is heard on neither side in the heat of 
passion. Therefore, it is difficult to apportion between them 
respective degrees of blame with reference to the state of 
things at the commencement of the fray but it must occur 
as a consequence of a sudden fight i.e. mutual combat 
and not one side track. It matters not what the cause of 
the quarrel is, whether real or imaginary, or who draws 
or strikes first. The strike of the blow must be without any 
intention to kill or seriously injure the other. If two men start 
fighting and one of them is unarmed while the other uses a 
deadly weapon, the one who uses such weapon must be 
held to have taken an undue advantage denying him the 
entitlement to Exception 4. True the number of wounds is 
not the criterion, but the position of the accused and the 
deceased with regard to their arms used, the manner of 
combat must be kept in mind when applying Exception 4. 
When the deceased was not armed but the accused was 
and caused injuries to the deceased with fatal results, 
the Exception 4 engrafted to Section 300 is excepted 
and the offences committed would be one of murder. 9. 
The occasion for sudden quarrel must not only be sudden 
but the party assaulted must be on an equal footing in 
point of defence, at least at the onset. This is specially 
so where the attack is made with dangerous weapons. 
Where the deceased was unarmed and did not cause 
any injury to the accused even following a sudden quarrel 
596
Supreme Court Reports
if the accused has inflicted fatal blows on the deceased, 
Exception 4 is not attracted and commission must be 
one of murder punishable under Section 302. Equally for 
attracting Exception 4 it is necessary that blows should be 
exchanged even if they do not all find their target. Even if 
the fight is unpremeditated and sudden, yet if the instrument 
or manner of retaliation be greatly disproportionate to the 
offence given, and cruel and dangerous in its nature, the 
accused cannot be protected under Exception 4....”
(Emphasis supplied)
47.	 This Court, in the case of Surain Singh v. State of Punjab, reported 
in (2017) 5 SCC 796 has observed that:
“The help of Exception 4 can be invoked if death is caused 
(a) without premeditation, (b) in a sudden fight, (c) without 
the offenders having taken undue advantage or acted in a 
cruel or unusual manner, and (d) the fight must have been 
with the person killed. To bring a case within Exception 4 
all the ingredients mentioned in it must be found. It is to 
be noted that the “fight” occurring in Exception 4 to Section 
300, IPC is not defined in IPC......... A fight is a combat 
between two and more persons whether with or without 
weapons. It is not possible to enunciate any general rule 
as to what shall be deemed to be a sudden quarrel. It is 
a question of fact and whether a quarrel is sudden or not 
must necessarily depend upon the proved facts of each 
case. For the application of Exception 4, it is not sufficient 
to show that there was a sudden quarrel and there was no 
premeditation. It must further be shown that the offender 
has not taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or 
unusual manner. The expression “undue advantage” as 
used in the provision means “unfair advantage”.”
(Emphasis supplied)
48.	 Section 304 of the IPC prescribes the punishment for culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder. Part I of this Section provides 
that if the act by which death is caused is done with the intention 
of causing death, or causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause 
death, then the punishment may extend up to imprisonment for life. 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
597
Narayan Yadav v. State of Chhattisgarh
On the other hand, Part II of Section 304 provides that if the offend-
ing act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, 
but without any intention to cause death or to cause such bodily 
injury as is likely to cause death, then the punishment may extend 
to imprisonment for 10 years.
49.	 The High Court considered only the first part of Exception 4 to Section 
300 of the IPC. This part refers to the absence of premeditation in 
a sudden fight arising from a sudden quarrel in a heat of passion. 
However, it does not end there. The exception further requires that 
the offender must not have taken undue advantage or acted in a 
cruel or unusual manner. Having regard to the manner in which the 
assault was carried out, could it not be said that the offender i.e., 
the appellant-herein took undue advantage and also could be said 
to have acted in a cruel or unusual manner. The deceased was 
unarmed, it was not mutual fight between two individuals that would 
bring the case within the ambit of Exception 4. The deceased was 
absolutely harmless when the appellant inflicted injuries all over his 
body indiscriminately. 
50.	 Therefore, if at all the High Court intended to extend the benefit of 
any of the Exceptions to Section 300 of the IPC, it ought to have 
considered Exception 1 of Section 300 of the IPC. However, it is not 
necessary for us to delve into Exception 1 i.e., grave and sudden 
provocation since, we have already reached the conclusion that 
the case in hand is, one of no legal evidence and therefore, the 
appellant deserves to be acquitted. We refer to Exception 1 merely 
to illustrate that, if at all, it was this exception that could have been 
examined. It is alleged that while the appellant and the deceased 
were consuming alcohol at the deceased’s residence, the appellant 
showed the deceased a photograph of his girlfriend. The deceased 
allegedly made an obscene remark, “get your girlfriend to my place 
and leave her with me for one night.” Such a statement might have 
provoked the appellant, who then picked up a vegetable-cutting 
knife lying in one corner of the house and inflicted injuries upon the 
deceased. This aspect could have been considered in that context. 
C.	
CONCLUSION
51.	 In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced that the Impugned 
Judgement passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh in Criminal 
Appeal No. 1538 of 2021 dated 16.01.2025 is not sustainable in law. 
598
Supreme Court Reports
52.	 In the result, this appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed.
53.	 The appellant is acquitted of all the charges, and he be set free 
forthwith if not required in any other case. The bail bonds stand 
discharged, if any. 
54.	 The Registry shall circulate one copy each of this judgment to all 
the High Courts.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey