[2025] 1 S.C.R. 403 : 2025 INSC 48
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another 
v. 
R.K. Pandey and Another
(Civil Appeal No. 10212 of 2014)
 09 January 2025
[Sanjiv Khanna,* CJI, Sanjay Kumar and  
R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to the enforceability of the ex-parte awards against 
the employer-State Government and the principal of the medical 
college, when the employer objected the authenticity of the 
arbitration agreement relied on by the employee.
Headnotes†
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Ex-parte arbitral 
awards  – Enforcement by employee, when denial of the 
authenticity of the arbitration agreement by employer – Service 
dispute by the employee against the State Government and 
the government hospital where he was employed as regards 
age of superannuation – Writ petition remained pending for 12 
years, thereafter was withdrawn – Year before, the employee 
initiated arbitration proceedings against the State Government 
and the principal of the medical college – Suit for reference 
filed which was later withdrawn without any decision on merits 
with the two sole arbitrators appointed by the employee, suo 
moto taking up the arbitration proceedings and pronouncing 
the two awards, for an amount of around Rs.46 lakhs with 
interest against the State and the Principal of the Medical 
College – Thereafter, employee sought enforcement of ex-parte 
awards – Employer objected the authenticity of the arbitration 
agreement relied on by employee – However, the courts below 
dismissed the objections – Correctness:
Held: Arbitration agreement is sine qua non for arbitration 
proceedings, as arbitration fundamentally relies on the principle of 
party autonomy-right of parties to choose arbitration as an alternative 
to court adjudication – Existence of the arbitration agreement is a 
prerequisite for an award to be enforceable in the eyes of law – 
* Author
404
On facts, arbitration proceedings were a mere sham and a fraud 
played by employee, by self-appointing/nominating arbitrators, who 
have passed ex-parte and invalid awards – Clear case of lack of 
subject matter jurisdiction – So-called arbitration agreement nowhere 
available on the records of either the Municipal Corporation or the 
State – Employee did not file the original agreement since he was 
not in possession of the same, nor is he a signatory and party to the 
arbitration agreement – Hospital and the Governor did not endorse 
any such agreement – Arbitration Agreement is not referred to in 
the indenture of the transfer executed – No evidence to show the 
existence of the arbitration agreement, except a piece of paper, 
which is not even a certified copy or authenticated copy of the official 
records – Notwithstanding that the claims made by employee were 
ex-facie and clearly barred by limitation as per s.3 of the Limitation 
Act 1963 rw s.43 they have been allowed – Thus, ex parte awards 
set aside and to be treated as null and void and non-enforceable 
in law – Impugned judgment set aside. [Paras 20-25]
Case Law Cited
Bilkis Yakub Rasool v. Union of India and Others [2024] 1 SCR 743 : 
(2024) 5 SCC 481; Central Organisation of Railway Electrification 
v. ECI PIC SMO MCPL (JV), a Joint Venture Company, 2024 INSC 
857 – referred to.
List of Acts
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908; Limitation Act 1963.
List of Keywords
Enforceability of ex-parte awards; Authenticity of the arbitration 
agreement; Ex-parte arbitral awards; Age of superannuation; 
Arbitration proceedings; Arbitration agreement; Lack of jurisdiction; 
Certified copy or authenticated copy of official records; Unilateral 
appointment of arbitrator by employee; Barred by limitation; 
Jurisdiction; Execution proceedings.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 10212 of 2014
From the Judgment and Order dated 28.02.2012 of the High court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in FAFO No. 352 of 2012
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
405
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another v. R.K. Pandey and Another
Appearances for Parties
Ankit Goel, Vikas Bansal, Nikhil Sharma, Advs. for the Appellants.
Mrs. Deepika Mishra, Abhishek Misra, Ms. Abha Jain, Jaivir Singh, 
Advs. for the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjiv Khanna, CJI
Delay condoned.
2.	
This appeal arises from an order dated 28.02.2012 passed by a 
Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in First 
Appeal from Order Defective No. 352/2012. 
3.	
The facts, in brief, are – Respondent no. 1, R.K. Pandey, was 
appointed as a Lab Assistant/ Technician in the T.B. Section of Dina 
Nath Parbati Bangla Infectious Disease1 Hospital located at Kanpur. 
The Municipal Board of Kanpur set up this hospital on the land given 
by the Kanpur Improvement Trust in 1944-45.
4.	
On 17.07.1956, DNPBID Hospital was taken over by the State 
Government, that is, the Government of Uttar Pradesh, to establish 
a new medical college at Kanpur pursuant to a Resolution dated 
17.07.1956 passed by the Administrator of the Municipal Board of 
Kanpur and six members of the Board of the hospital. On 29.03.1957, 
the State Government accepted the proposal dated 17.07.1956.
5.	
On 20.06.1961, a transfer deed was executed between the Nagar 
Mahapalika of the City of Kanpur and the Governor of the State of Uttar 
Pradesh. The said deed has been placed on the record. It states that 
in terms of the G.O. dated 29.03.1957, the entire municipal staff of the 
hospital, as per the list attached to the indenture, will stand transferred 
to the State Government service. The staff will not be unfavourably 
placed as regards emoluments or other service conditions, nor shall 
they suffer in the matter of emoluments, leave, age of retirement, 
and other benefits as compared to the terms of service of the Board.
1	
Hereinafter, “DNPBID.”
406
6.	
After the settlement was executed, the hospital became a unit of 
Ganesh Shanker Vidayarthi Memorial2 Medical College, Kanpur. 
Thereupon, it is apparent that the employees working in DNPBID 
Hospital opted for service under the State Government and had 
sent their consent which was accepted. Thereafter, their service 
records were sent to the State Government. It was agreed that the 
concessions and privileges enjoyed by the staff before the aforesaid 
hospital were provincialized and will continue in future and they will 
not be put to a disadvantage by the take-over. The Board agreed to 
pay Rs.50,000/- keeping in view the liability of the Municipal Board.
7.	
Vide letter dated 09.01.1997, the Chief Medical Superintendent of 
the hospital, now a State Government hospital, informed Respondent 
No. 1, R.K. Pandey that he would be superannuating on 31.03.1997. 
He was requested to contact the office along with pension papers and 
submit the same within one week so that the process can be initiated. 
8.	
In March 1997, Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, filed a writ petition 
before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad claiming that he 
should retire at the age of 60 years instead of 58 years, relying upon 
the service rules as applicable to the employees of the Municipal 
Board of Kanpur. 
9.	
Pursuant to the filing of the writ petition, Respondent No.1, R.K. 
Pandey was directed to make a representation. While a representation 
was indeed made, it was subsequently rejected observing that the 
respondent had been in service of the State Government for 42 
years and was availing all pay and allowances, as per the State 
Government rules. 
10.	 The State Government filed an affidavit opposing the writ petition inter 
alia, stating that Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, having acquired 
the status of State Government service was bound and governed 
by the rules and regulations of the State Government. It was also 
stated that the minimum age for entering the government service is 
18 years, and if a government servant retires at the age of 58 years, 
he would have completed 40 years of service. In the present case, 
Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey had completed service of 42 years 
of service. In other words, he would be 60 years of age.
2	
Hereinafter, “GVSM.”
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
407
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another v. R.K. Pandey and Another
11.	 No interim order was passed in the writ petition, which remained 
pending till it was withdrawn by Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey 
on 22.04.2009. Consequently, the prayers made in the writ petition 
were not granted.
12.	 Notwithstanding the pendency of the writ petition, on 11.01.2008, 
Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, filed an arbitration suit before 
the District Judge, Kanpur Nagar, Kanpur, relying upon an 
alleged arbitration agreement dated 01.04.1957 between the then 
Administrator of the DNBPID Hospital and the Governor of Uttar 
Pradesh. The prayer sought was for the dispute regarding Respondent 
No. 1, R.K. Pandey’s age of superannuation and the rejection of his 
representation dated 03.04.1997 by the Principal of GVSM Medical 
College be referred to arbitration. However, the arbitration agreement 
was not mentioned either in the writ petition or in the application for 
its withdrawal. Subsequently, on 15.02.2008, Respondent No. 1, R.K. 
Pandey, withdrew the suit seeking to refer the disputes to arbitration.
13.	 On 29.11.2008, Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, filed two execution 
petitions before the District Judge in Kanpur, seeking to enforce two 
separate ex parte awards issued on 15.02.2008 and 25.06.2008 
by Advocates Pawan Kumar Tewari and Indivar Vajpayee. These 
proceedings were initiated by Respondent No. 1 against the State 
Government and the Principal of GSVM Medical College, Kanpur.
14.	 The first ex-parte award dated 15.02.2008 decreed the claim of 
Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey for an amount of Rs.26,42,116/- with 
interest at the rate of 18 % per annum from 21.01.2008 against the 
State of Uttar Pradesh and the Principal GSVM Medical College, 
Kanpur. The award states that Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey had 
appointed/ nominated the Arbitrator and there was non-appointment 
by the opposite party and, therefore, Pawan Kumar Tewari, Advocate 
had acted as the sole Arbitrator. 
15.	 The second ex parte Award dated 25.06.2008 passed by Indivar 
Vajpayee awarded an amount of Rs.20,00,000/- along with interest 
at the rate of 9% per annum with effect from 11.02.2008 in favour 
of Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, and against the opposite party, 
viz. the State of Uttar Pradesh and the Principal of GSVM Medical 
College, Kanpur. The Award states that Respondent No. 1 had 
appointed Indivar Vajpayee as an Arbitrator on 25.06.2008, albeit the 
opposite party had not appointed an Arbitrator and, hence Indivar 
Vajpayee acted as the sole Arbitrator.
408
16.	 The appellant on receiving notice in the execution petition filed viz. 
the Award given by Indivar Vajpayee, filed objections against the two 
awards under Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.3 
One of the issues raised before the executing court concerned the 
existence of the arbitration agreement, purportedly dated 01.04.1957, 
which Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, relied upon. This agreement 
was claimed to have been executed and signed on behalf of the 
Administrator of the Municipal Board and the Additional Secretary 
of the Government of Uttar Pradesh.
17.	 The authenticity of this document was denied. Notably, this document 
or the arbitration agreement is not reflected in the transfer deed 
executed on 20.06.1961. Furthermore, the purported arbitration 
agreement was neither mentioned in the writ petition filed by 
Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, in March 1997, nor referenced in 
any correspondence or related documents until Respondent No. 1, 
R.K. Pandey, filed a petition under Section 11 of the A&C Act, for 
the appointment of an arbitrator on 11.01.2008. By this petition, 
Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, had prayed for the appointment 
of an arbitrator. As recorded above, the said petition was dismissed 
as withdrawn on 15.02.2008, which was also the date on which the 
first award for Rs.20,00,000/- with interest at the rate of 18 % per 
annum was passed by Pawan Kumar Tewari, Advocate. The second 
Award by Indivar Vajpayee dated 25.06.2008 is also pursuant to the 
appointment of an arbitrator by Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey 
without recourse to court proceedings. 
18.	 The objections filed by the appellants under Section 34 of the 
A&C Act were dismissed by the trial court on the ground that 
they were barred by limitation and had been filed beyond the 
condonable period. Interestingly, during the pendency of the said 
objections, a query had been raised as to the existence of the 
arbitration agreement dated 01.04.1957, which was relied upon by 
Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey. In a reply given by the Municipal 
Corporation/Mahanagar Palika to the Advocate appointed by District 
Government Counsel (Civil), Kanpur Nagar, it was stated that the 
photocopy furnished of the agreement was not clear and there 
was no such agreement available on the record. Hence, it was 
3	
Hereinafter, “A&C Act.”
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
409
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another v. R.K. Pandey and Another
not possible to verify the said document. The purported agreement 
dated 01.04.1957 is not signed and executed by Respondent 
No. 1, R.K. Pandey, and a copy of the agreement is not marked 
to him. The authenticity of the agreement cannot be established 
as it is not available on the record of the Municipal Board. The 
State Government, as is evident, has denied the existence of any 
such agreement.
19.	 The impugned judgment passed by the Division Bench of the High 
Court of Judicature at Allahabad dismissed the intra court appeal on 
the grounds that the objections itself were barred by limitation and 
beyond the condonable period.
20.	 We have narrated the facts in detail as they are peculiar, and 
intervention by this Court is necessary to prevent any attempt to 
enforce the so-called awards, which are null and void ab initio for 
several reasons. This Court in its decision in Bilkis Yakub Rasool 
v. Union of India and Others,4 observes that fraud and justice 
never dwell together, and a litigant should not be able to benefit 
from a fraud practiced with an intention to secure him an illegal 
benefit. In the present case, the so-called arbitration agreement is 
nowhere available on the records of either the Municipal Corporation 
or the State of Uttar Pradesh. Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, 
did not file the original agreement since he was not in possession 
of the same, nor is he a signatory and party to the arbitration 
agreement. An arbitration agreement is sine qua non for arbitration 
proceedings, as arbitration fundamentally relies on the principle 
of party autonomy; - the right of parties to choose arbitration as 
an alternative to court adjudication. In this sense, ‘existence’ of 
the arbitration agreement is a prerequisite for an award to be 
enforceable in the eyes of law. No doubt, Section 7 of the A&C 
Act, which defines the ‘arbitration agreement’, is expansive and 
includes an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which 
the existence of the agreement is alleged by one party and not 
denied by the other party, albeit the existence of the arbitration 
agreement is not accepted by either the Municipal Corporation or 
the Appellant, the State of Uttar Pradesh. The Arbitration Agreement 
is not referred to in the indenture of the transfer executed later 
4	
[2024] 1 SCR 743 : (2024) 5 SCC 481
410
on 20.06.1961. There is no evidence to show the existence of the 
arbitration agreement, except a piece of paper, which is not even 
a certified copy or an authenticated copy of the official records. 
How and from where RK Pandey, Respondent No. 1, got a copy 
of the agreement, and that too nearly 10 years after his retirement 
and filing of a writ petition remains unknown.
21.	 The arbitration agreement, as propounded, is between the Municipal 
Corporation and Development Board, Kanpur, and the appellant, the 
Governor of the State of Uttar Pradesh. For the sake of reference, 
the arbitration agreement is reproduced:
“This Arbitration Agreement made on the First April, 
One Thousand Nine Hundred Fifty Seven between the 
Municipal and Development Board Kanpur (hereinafter 
called the Board) of the one part and the Governor of 
Uttar Pradesh (hereinafter, called the Government) of 
the other part.
It is mutually agreed by the and between the parties as 
follows:
All disputes or difference whatsoever which shall if any 
time arise between the parties including the employees 
of Provincialized DN Bangla I.D. Hospital, Kanpur, 
hereto touching or concerning the resolution passed 
by the Managing Committee of the said Hospital at the 
meeting held on 17.07.1956, which was accepted by the 
Government, shall be referred to the Arbitrators nominated 
by the Principal GSVM Medical College, Kanpur and 
the administrator of the Board or employees of the said 
provincialized Hospital for arbitration under the Arbitration 
Act. Any statutory modification of re-enactment thereof and 
the rules made thereunder for the time being enforced 
shall apply to the Arbitration proceedings. If one party 
nominates the arbitrator and refers the dispute to the 
nominated arbitrator for adjudication in writing notice to 
the other party and the other party fails to nominate the 
arbitrator within 10 days then the arbitrator nominated by 
the First Party shall be final and act as a sole arbitrator. 
The award of the arbitrators/sole arbitrator shall be final 
and binding on the parties.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
411
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another v. R.K. Pandey and Another
This agreement signed by the administrator on behalf of 
the Board and the Additional Secretary of the Government 
of UP on behalf of the Government.
M.A. Quraishi, I.C.C. 
Administrator 
Municipal & Development Board 
Kanpur
G.P. Pandey, Addl. Secretary to the Govt. of UP”
The agreement postulates that each party, that is, the Municipal and 
Development Board, Kanpur, and the Governor of Uttar Pradesh, 
may nominate an arbitrator for adjudication by giving written notice 
to the other party. In the event the other party fails to nominate an 
arbitrator within ten days, the arbitrator nominated by the first party 
shall act as the sole arbitrator. It was not the case of Respondent 
No. 1, R.K. Pandey that the Municipal and Development Board, 
Kanpur, or the Governor of Uttar Pradesh has invoked the arbitration 
clause. The unilateral appointment of the arbitrator by Respondent 
No. 1, R.K. Pandey is, therefore, contrary to the arbitration clause 
as propounded by him.
22.	 Another intriguing aspect is the delay in relying on the arbitration 
agreement and initiating arbitration proceedings. Respondent No. 1, 
R.K. Pandey, himself filed the writ petition in 1997 concerning the 
same dispute. The writ petition had remained pending till 22.04.2009, 
when it was withdrawn. It is during the pendency of the petition, 
that the steps for initiation of arbitration were taken on 11.01.2008 
by Respondent No.1, R.K. Pandey, by filing a suit for reference in 
terms of Section 11 of the A&C Act. However, the petition was later 
withdrawn without any decision on merits with the two sole arbitrators 
appointed by Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, suo moto taking up 
the arbitration proceedings and pronouncing the two awards, the 
first dated 15.02.2008 for an amount of Rs.26,42,116/- with interest 
at the rate of 18% per annum, and the second dated 25.06.2008 
for an amount of Rs.20,00,000/- along with interest at the rate of 
nine percent per annum with effect from 11.02.2008, against the 
Appellants, the State of Uttar Pradesh and the Principal of GSVM 
Medical College, Kanpur. Notwithstanding that the claims made by 
Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, were ex-facie and clearly barred 
412
by limitation as per Section 3 of the Limitation Act 1963 read with 
Section 43 of the A&C Act, they have been allowed. 
23.	 A 5-Judge Constitution Bench of this Court in Central Organisation 
of Railway Electrification v. ECI PIC SMO MCPL (JV), a Joint 
Venture Company 5 has observed that equity applies at the stage 
of appointment of arbitrators, though the A&C Act recognizes 
the autonomy of parties to decide on all aspects of arbitration. 
The enactment lays down a procedural framework to regulate 
the composition of the arbitral tribunal and conduct of arbitration 
proceedings. It is only then that the arbitral tribunals, which have the 
backing of courts, can act objectively and exercise their discretion 
in a judicial manner, without caprice and in accordance with the 
principles of law and rules of natural justice. This is the core of the 
alternate dispute redressal mechanism, which is also the core of 
Section 18 of the A&C Act and is a non-derogable and mandatory 
provision. It is only then the arbitrators are vested with the power to 
resolve the dispute under the law. This judgment also observed that 
the unilateral appointment of arbitrators has a direct effect on the 
conduct of arbitral proceedings. Arbitration, which is quasi-judicial, 
requires a standard of behaviour of arbitrators, which is impartial 
and independent, no less stringent than that demanded of judges. In 
fact, arbitrators are expected to uphold a higher standard, as court 
decisions are subject to the collective scrutiny of an appeal, while an 
arbitration award typically enjoys greater acceptability, recognition, 
and enforceability.
24.	 We have made our observations in the context of Section 47 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, which even at the stage of execution, 
permits a party to object to the decree, both on the grounds of fraud, 
as well as lack of subject matter jurisdiction. It is apparent that 
the arbitration proceedings were a mere sham and a fraud played 
by Respondent No.1, R.K. Pandey, by self-appointing/nominating 
arbitrators, who have passed ex-parte and invalid awards. To reiterate, 
Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, is not a signatory to the purported 
arbitration agreement. Moreover, the parties thereto, DNPBID 
Hospital and the Governor of Uttar Pradesh, do not endorse any 
5	
2024 INSC 857
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
413
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another v. R.K. Pandey and Another
such agreement. From the cumulative facts and reasons elucidated 
above, this is a clear case of lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
25.	 Accordingly, we allow the present appeal and set aside the two ex 
parte Awards dated 15.02.2008 and 25.06.2008. Both the Awards 
shall be treated as null and void and non-enforceable in law. 
Resultantly, the judgment passed, and the subject matter of the 
appeal shall be treated as set aside. The execution proceedings 
shall stand dismissed. The appellants will be entitled to costs of the 
entire proceedings as per the law.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain