[2025] 5 S.C.R. 458 : 2025 INSC 467
Rajiv Ghosh 
v. 
Satya Naryan Jaiswal
(Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 9975 of 2025)
07 April 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
In view of the unequivocal admission made by the defendant 
in his written statement, whether the High Court was right in 
decreeing the suit for recovery of possession applying Or.XII 
r.6 of the CPC thereby, affirming the decree of eviction passed 
by the trial court.
Headnotes†
Civil Procedure Code, 1908 – Or.XII, r.6 – Judgment on 
admissions – West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1997  – 
s.2(g)  – Suit for recovery of possession – Admission of 
certain facts by the defendant in his written statement – In 
view thereof, the plaintiff filed application u/Or.XII r.6 for 
decree upon admission – Trial Court decreed the suit – 
Appeal filed by the defendant, dismissed by High Court – 
Correctness:
Held: r.6(1) empowers the court to pronounce a judgment upon 
admissions made by parties without waiting for the determination 
of other questions – The words “or otherwise” used in Or.XII, 
r.6 are wide enough to include all cases of admissions made in 
the pleadings or de hors the pleadings – In the present case, 
having regard to the clear and unequivocal admission made by 
the defendant in his written statement, the High Court committed 
no error much less any error of law in decreeing the suit applying 
Or.XII r.6. [Paras 35, 44]
Civil Procedure Code, 1908 – Or. XII r.6 – Nature of – Exercise 
of discretion u/Or. XII r.6:
Held: The provisions of r.6 are enabling, discretionary and 
permissive – They are not mandatory, obligatory or peremptory – 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
459
Rajiv Ghosh v. Satya Naryan Jaiswal
This is also clear from the use of the word “may” in the rule – The 
powers conferred on the court by this rule are untrammeled and 
cannot be crystallized into any rigid rule of universal application – 
They can be exercised keeping in view and having regard to the 
facts and varying circumstances of each case – If the court is of 
the opinion that it is not safe to pass a judgment on admissions, or 
that a case involves questions which cannot be appropriately dealt 
with and decided on the basis of admission, it may, in exercise 
of its discretion, refuse to pass a judgment and may insist upon 
clear proof of even admitted facts. [Paras 28-30]
Civil Procedure Code, 1908 – Or. XII r.6 – Object of – Code of 
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976. [Paras 25, 26]
Words and Phrases – ‘Otherwise’ – Civil Procedure Code, 
1908 – Or. XII r.6 – Discussed. [Para 37]
Case Law Cited
ITDC Limited v. Chander Pal Sood and Son (2000) 84 DLT 337 
(DB) : (2000 AIHC 1990) – approved.
Uttam Singh v. United Bank of India [2000] Supp. 2 SCR 187 : 
(2000) 7 SCC 120; Bai Chanchal v. United Bank of India [1971] 
SCR 2 171 : AIR 1971 SC 1081; Balraj Taneja v. Sunil Madan 
[1999] Supp. 2 SCR 258 : (1999) 8 SCC 396 – referred to.
Sivalinga v. Narayani, AIR 1946 Mad 151; Sher Bahadur v. Mohd. 
Amin, AIR 1929 Lah 569; Throp v. Holdsworth, Jessel, reported, 
(1876)3 Ch D 637 (640); Brown v. Pearson (1882) 21 Ch D 716 – 
referred to.
List of Acts
Civil Procedure Code, 1908; West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 
1997; Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976.
List of Keywords
Order XII, Rule 6 of Civil Procedure Code, 1908; Judgment 
on admissions; Admission in written statement; Recovery of 
possession; Eviction decree; Original tenant; Statutory right of 
inherited tenancy; Written statement; Decree upon admission; Legal 
heir of original tenant; Admission made in pleadings; Rejoinder; 
Non-admitted claim.
460
Supreme Court Reports
Case Arising From
EXTRAORDINARY CIVIL JURISDICTION: Special Leave Petition 
(Civil) No. 9975 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 14.11.2024 of the High Court 
of Calcutta in FAT No. 7 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Petitioner:
Ramnath Jha, Amit.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
Delay condoned in filing Special Leave Petition.
2.	
This petition arises from the judgment and order passed by the High 
Court at Calcutta (Civil Appellate Jurisdiction) dated 14.11.2024 in 
FAT 7 of 2024 with IA No. CAN 1 of 2024 by which the appeal filed 
by the petitioner-herein came to be dismissed thereby affirming the 
judgment and decree of eviction passed by the Vth Bench, City Civil 
Court at Calcutta, District Calcutta dated 2nd December 2023 in title 
suit no. 1068 of 2021.
3.	
For the sake of convenience, the petitioner-herein shall be referred 
to as original defendant and the respondent-herein shall be referred 
to as original plaintiff.
4.	
It appears from the materials on record that the plaintiff is the lawful 
owner of the suit premises in which the defendant claims to be the 
lawful tenant. The plaintiff instituted title suit no. 1068 of 2021 for 
recovery of possession and mesne profits against the defendant. The 
father of the defendant, Late Ranjan Ghosh was a regular tenant 
under the plaintiff in respect of the suit premises at a monthly rent 
of Rs. 1700 including corporation taxes.
5.	
Ranjan Ghosh, the original tenant passed away on 13.07.2016. It 
appears that the defendant being the son of Ranjan Ghosh was 
residing in the suit premises up to the date of demise of his father.
6.	
The plaintiff served a notice dated 20th July 2018 to the defendant 
informing him that since the original regular tenant, Ranjan Ghosh 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
461
Rajiv Ghosh v. Satya Naryan Jaiswal
passed away on 13.07.2016 and the defendant being the son of the 
regular tenant who at the time of demise of the regular tenant was 
residing in the scheduled property he can at best take the benefit of 
his statutory right of inherited tenancy up to 5 years from the date 
of death of his father, Ranjan Ghosh on 13.07.2016.
7.	
The notice further informed the defendant that he cannot be regarded 
as tenant within Section 2(g) of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy 
Act, 1997.
8.	
The said notice was received by the defendant on 21.07.2018, 
however, the defendant failed to give any satisfactory reply.
9.	
In such circumstances referred to above, the plaintiff had to institute 
the title suit for recovery of the possession. The defendant filed his 
written statement and in the same he is said to have admitted few 
facts arising thereof. The defendant in his written statement admitted 
the following claims of the plaintiff.
a)	
the defendant unequivocally admitted in paragraph no. 10(a) of 
his written statement that Ranjan Ghosh was the sole tenant 
in respect of the suit property. The said Ranjan Ghosh passed 
away in 13.07.2016 leaving behind the defendant as his heir 
and legal representative.
b)	
The defendant admitted that the plaintiff is the owner of the 
scheduled property and the rent was paid till May 2021 to the 
plaintiff.
10.	 In view of the aforesaid admissions made by the defendant in his 
written statement, the plaintiff preferred an application before the 
trial court under Order XII Rule 6 of the Civil Procedure Code and 
prayed for a decree upon admission.
11.	 The application filed by the plaintiff under Order XII Rule 6 of the 
CPC was opposed by the defendant by filing reply which reads thus:
“1. That the said application is neither maintainable in law 
nor on facts and the same is bad, frivolous, vexatious, 
baseless, unfounded and misconceived as such the said 
application is liable to be rejected with cost to the defendant.
2. That there is no admission in the pleadings on behalf of 
the defendant, C.P. Code does not define the expression 
“admission” Section 17 of the Indian Evidence Act defines 
462
Supreme Court Reports
admission as a statement made in the oral, documentary 
or electronic form suggesting an inference to a fact in 
issue or relevant fact. Section 23 of the Indian Evidence 
Act lists the circumstances under which an admission will 
be relevant in civil cases. However, the proviso to the 
Section states that the Court has discretionary power to 
require the alleged admitted, facts to be proven by means 
other than such admission. It is pertinent to note that the 
Rule provides that Court “may” pass a judgment or order 
based on the admission. Thus, it is clear that the legislative 
intent is to confer a discretionary power of the Court and 
judgment based on admission cannot be clarified as a 
matter of right. The legislative intent is further clarified by 
the proviso to Order 6 Rule 5. The proviso provides that 
even, where a fact has been admitted by an admission, 
the Court has discretionary power to require the admitted 
fact to be proved by any other means.
3. That the defendant states that there are material issues 
involved in the instant suit which are very much triable 
therefore, the Ld. Court should not, proceed with the 
passing, a decree under Order 12 Rule 6 of C.P.Code. 
In order to fair disposal of the instant suit, the instant 
suit needed to be decided by a full fledged trial and an 
opportunity to be given the defendant to lead evidence 
for the interest of justice, therefore, the said application 
is liable to be rejected in limine.
4. With reference to the statements made in paragraph 
Nos. 1, 2 and 3 of the said application, the defendant 
denies the same save and except what are matters of 
record and calls, upon the plaintiff to strictest proof thereof.
5. With reference to the statements made in paragraph 
Nos. 5 and 6 of the said application, the defendant denies 
the same save and except what are matters of record 
and calls upon the plaintiff to strictest proof thereof. The 
defendant states that by his Written Statement, filed in 
Court has been categorically challenged the allegations 
made by the Plaintiff which is required to be proved by 
way of an evidence by the parties of this suit.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
463
Rajiv Ghosh v. Satya Naryan Jaiswal
6. With reference to the statements made in paragraph No. 
7 of the said application, the defendant denies the same 
save and except what are matters of record.
7. With reference to the statements made in paragraph No. 
8 of the said application, the defendant denies the same.
8. With reference to the statements made in paragraph 
No. 9 of the said application, the defendant denies the 
same save and except what are matters of record and 
calls upon the plaintiff to strictest proof thereof.
9. With reference to the statements made in paragraphs 
No. 10, 11 and 12 of the said application, the defendant 
denies the same. The defendant denies that he admitted 
anything in his pleadings that the defendant is a trespasser 
as alleged, on the other hand, he categorically stated that 
he is a tenant in respect of the suit premises and he paid 
rent to the plaintiff in respect of the suit premises. Moreover, 
the defendant filed an application u/s 7(1) & 7(2) of the 
W.B.P.T. Act before this Ld. Court for payment of current 
rent as well as arrears rent if any due and payable and 
those applications are pending before this Ld. Court. The 
defendant states that the facts of this case as made out in 
the plaint should be considered by this Ld. Court as a whole 
for the interest of justice because the cause of action of 
this suit arose on the bundle of facts. The defendant never 
admitted in pleadings that he is enjoying the suit premises 
as trespassed. Therefore, without taking an evidence, the 
instant suit cannot be adjudicated properly, therefore the 
said application is liable to be rejected with cost.
It is prayed that the said application be rejected with cost.”
12.	 The trial court adjudicated the application and ultimately decreed the 
suit having regard to the specific admissions made by the defendant.
13.	 The defendant being dissatisfied with the decree passed by the trial 
court based on admissions challenged the same before the High 
Court by filing FAT No. 7 of 2024. The High Court dismissed the 
FAT holding as under:
“12. According to the said clause, the dependent heir of 
the original tenant, unless she is the widow of the original 
464
Supreme Court Reports
tenant, is entitled to carry on as a tenant [coming within 
the definition of “tenant” as defined in Section 2(g)] to 
continue in such capacity for a period of 5 years from the 
demise of the original tenant
13. Hence, although the defendant has not pleaded in 
the Written statement that he was a dependent of the: 
original tenant, which should have further cut short his 
period of tenancy, even proceeding on the premise that 
the defendant was a dependent, he, being the Son of the 
original tenant, would be :entitled to sustain his tenancy 
in such capacity only up to the, expiry of a period- of 5 
years from the demise of the original tenant.
14. From the pleadings in the written statement, it is 
evident that the said period was already over at the time 
of institution of the suit, since the original tenant, his father 
Ranjan Ghosh, met his demise on July 13, 2016. 
15. It is further admitted in the written statement that the 
landlord/plaintiff, quite rightly, stopped accepting rent, from 
the defendant after May, 2021 i.e. after the expiry of the 
said period of five years from the death of the original 
landlord.
16. Hence, the pleadings in the written statement comprise 
of sufficient ingredients to bring the defendant within the 
fold of Section 2(g) of the 1997 Act. 
17. It may be clarified here that, it is well-settled that law 
of legal ‘arguments need not be pleaded in the pleadings, 
either by way of a plaint or a written statement.
18. As such, the defendant need not have specifically 
pleaded, the applicability of Section 2(g) of the 1997 Act 
for the purpose of the pleading to acquire the Character 
of an admission, for the purpose of Order XII Rule 6 of 
the Code. It would suffice, as in the present case, if the 
necessary factual ingredients to satisfy Section 2(g) are 
pleaded in the written statement, for it to be deemed to be 
an admission that the defendant comes within the purview 
of Section. 2(g).
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
465
Rajiv Ghosh v. Satya Naryan Jaiswal
19. That is precisely the case here. 
20. In the event the defendant comes within Section 2(g) 
of the 1997 Act, nothing remains to be adjudicated further 
in the. suit, since the defendant is automatically relegated 
to the status of a trespasser, and the plaintiff immediately 
becomes entitled to get a decree for eviction in the absence 
of any further of independent right having been claimed 
by the defendant.
21. The defendant, in the written statement, claims entirely 
through his father, the original tenant. The pleading as 
to there being a talk of a fresh tenancy being granted in 
favour of the defendant is neither here nor there since 
even the said pleading does not tantamount to-establish 
that a new tenancy has already been created in favour of 
the defendant, in which case, the outcome of the litigation 
might have been otherwise.
 22. As such, the learned Trial Judge was fully justified in 
resorting to Section 2(g) of the 1997 Act, read with Order 
XII Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, to come to the 
finding that the plaintiff automatically gets entitled to a 
decree for eviction by way of a judgment on admission. 
23. In such view of the matter, we do not find any justification 
to interfere with the impugned judgment and decree. 
24. Accordingly, FAT 7 of 2024 is dismissed on contest, 
thereby affirming the judgment and decree dated December 
2, 2023 passed by the learned Judge, Fifth Bench, City 
Civil Court at Calcutta, District- Calcutta in Title Suit No. 
1068 of 2021.
25. There will be no order as to costs. 
26. Keeping in view the pendency of the appeal till now, 
the defendant/appellant is granted a further period of three 
months to vacate the premises in favour of the plaintiff/
respondent. The pending execution n case shall remain 
stayed for such period.
27. In the event the defendant/appellant does not vacate 
the premises within the said period, of three months from 
this date, the plaintiff/decree holder will be at liberty to 
466
Supreme Court Reports
proceed with the execution case and the same will be 
expedited by the executing court. 
28. Interim order, if any, stands vacated. 
29. A formal decree be drawn up accordingly.”
14.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the defendant is here before 
this Court with the present petition.
15.	 We heard Mr. Ramnath Jha, the learned counsel appeared on behalf 
of Mr. Amit Kumar, the learned counsel appearing for the defendant. 
16.	 Section 2(g) of the 1997 Act reads thus:
“2. Definitions.” In this Act, unless there is anything, 
repugnant in the subject or context,
(g) “tenant” means any person by whom or on whose 
account or behalf the rent of any premises is or, but for 
a special contract, would be payable, and includes, any 
person continuing in possession after termination of his 
tenancy and, in the event of death of any tenant, also 
includes, for a period not exceeding five years from the 
date of death of such tenant or from the date of coming 
into force of this Act, whichever is later, his spouse, son, 
daughter, parent and the widow of his predeceased son, 
who were ordinarily living with the tenant up to the date 
of death of the tenant as the members of his family and 
were dependent on him and who do not own or occupy 
any residential premises, and in respect of premises let 
out for non-residential purpose his spouse, sort, daughter 
and parent who were ordinarily living with the tenant up to 
the date of his death as members of his family, and were 
dependent on him or a person authorised by the tenant 
who is in possession of such premises but shall not include 
any person, against whom any decree or order for eviction 
has been made by a Court of competent jurisdiction:
 Provided that the time-limit of five years shall not apply 
to the spouse of the tenant who was ordinarily living with 
the tenant up to his death as a member of his family and 
was dependent on him and who does not own of occupy 
any residential premises: 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
467
Rajiv Ghosh v. Satya Naryan Jaiswal
Provided further that the son, daughter, parent or the 
widow of the predeceased son of the tenant who was 
ordinarily residing with the tenant in the said premises 
up to the date of death of the tenant as a member of his 
family and was dependent on him and who does not own 
or occupy any residential premises, shall have a right of 
preference for tenancy, in a fresh agreement in respect of 
such premises on condition of payment of fair rent. This 
proviso shall apply mutatis mutandis to premises let out 
for non-residential purpose.”
17.	 Thus, the plain reading of Section 2(g) referred to above would 
indicate that the dependent heir of the original tenant unless she 
is the widow of the original tenant would be entitled to carry on as 
a tenant [coming within the definition of “tenant” as defined under 
Section 2(g)] in such capacity for a period of 5 years from the demise 
of the original tenant.
18.	 In the case on hand, the defendant is the son of the original tenant. 
It is not in dispute that he claims his right to continue as a tenant in 
the suit premises through his father i.e. the original tenant.
19.	 Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC reads thus:
6. Judgment on admissions.—(1) Where admissions of 
fact have been made either in the pleading or otherwise, 
whether orally or in writing, the Court may at any stage 
of the suit, either on the application of any party or of its 
own motion and without waiting for the determination of 
any other question between the parties, make such order 
or give such judgment as it may think fit, having regard 
to such admissions. 
(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under sub-rule 
(1) a decree shall be drawn up in accordance with the 
judgment and the decree shall bear the date on which 
the judgment was pronounced.
LEGISLATIVE CHANGES
20.	 By the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976, the following 
changes had been effected: 
468
Supreme Court Reports
(1)	 Original Rule 6 had been substituted and redrafted into sub-
rule (1) and
(2)	 Sub-rule (2) had been newly inserted,
OBJECT OF AMENDMENTS
21.	 Rule 6, as originally enacted, enabled a court to pronounce judgment 
or admission “either in pleading or otherwise”. It read thus: 
“6. Judgment on admissions.— Any party may, at any 
stage of a suit. where admissions of facts have been 
made, either on pleadings or otherwise, apply to the Court 
for such judgment or order as upon such admissions he 
may be entitled to, without waiting for the determination 
of any other question between the parties and the Court 
may upon such application make such order or give such 
judgment, as the Court may think just.” 
22.	 The Law Commission considered the provision. With a view to 
clarify the position as to admission and also to empower the court 
to pronounce a judgment: suo motu and to draw a decree on such 
judgment, recommended to modify the rule. It stated: 
“Where a claim is admitted, a court has jurisdiction under 
Order XII Rule 6 to enter a judgment for the plaintiff, and 
to pass a decree on the admitted claim (with liberty to the 
plaintiff to proceed with the suit in the ordinary way as to 
the remainder of the claim). 
The object of the rule is to enable a party to obtain speedy 
judgment, at least to the extent of the relief to which, 
according to the admission of the defendant, the plaintiff 
is entitled. 
The rule has been held to be wide enough to cover oral 
admissions. The use of the words ‘or otherwise’ in Rule 6, 
without the words ‘in writing’ which are used in Rule 1 of 
Order XII, shows that a judgment may be given even on an 
oral admission. It is desirable to codify this interpretation. 
It may be noted that under the present rule, a judgment 
on admission can be passed only on an application. 
According to a local amendment. the Court may, on the 
application of any party or of its own motion, make such 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
469
Rajiv Ghosh v. Satya Naryan Jaiswal
order or give such judgment. This is a useful amendment, 
and should be adopted. 
In our view, it is also desirable to provide that a decree 
shall follow or » judgment on admissions.” (See: Law 
Commission’s Fifty-fourth Report, p. 145)
23.	 In Statement of Objects and Reasons, it had been stated:
“Clause 65, sub-clause (ii)- Under Rule 6, where a claim 
is admitted, the Court has jurisdiction to enter a judgment 
for the plaintiff and to pass a decree on the admitted claim. 
The object of the rule is to enable a party to obtain speedy 
judgment at least to the extent of relief to which, according 
to the admission of the defendant, the plaintiff is entitled. 
The rule is wide enough to cover oral admissions. The rule 
is being amended to clarify that oral admissions are also 
covered by the rule” (See: Notes on Clauses, Gazette of 
India, dt. 08-04-1974, Pt. II, S.2, Extra., p. 316)
24.	 Rule 6(1) empowers the court to pronounce a judgment upon 
admissions made by parties without waiting for the determination 
of other questions.
25.	 Rule 6(2) states that a decree shall be drawn up in accordance with 
the judgment.
26.	 The primary object underlying Rule 6 is to enable a party to obtain 
speedy judgment at least to the extent of admission. Where a 
plaintiff claims a particular relief or reliefs against a defendant and 
the defendant makes a plain admission, the former is entitled to the 
relief or reliefs admitted by the latter. [See: Uttam Singh v. United 
Bank of India, (2000) 7 SCC 120]
27.	 As observed in the Statement of Objects and Reasons for amending 
Rule 6, “where a claim is admitted, the court has jurisdiction to enter 
a judgment for the plaintiff and to pass a decree on admitted claim. 
The object of the Rule is to enable the party to obtain a speedy 
judgment at least to the extent of the relief to which according to 
the admission of the defendant, the plaintiff is entitled.” 
28.	 The provisions of Rule 6 are enabling, discretionary and permissive. 
They are not mandatory, obligatory or peremptory. This is also clear 
from the use of the word “may” in the rule. 
470
Supreme Court Reports
29.	 The powers conferred on the court by this rule are untrammeled 
and cannot be crystallized into any rigid rule of universal application. 
They can be exercised keeping in view and having regard to the 
facts and varying circumstances of each case.
30.	 If the court is of the opinion that it is not safe to pass a judgment 
on admissions, or that a case involves questions which cannot be 
appropriately dealt with and decided on the basis of admission, it 
may, in exercise of its discretion, refuse to pass a judgment and may 
insist upon clear proof of even admitted facts.
31.	 To make order or to pronounce judgment on admission is at the 
discretion of the court. First, the word “may” is used in Rule 6 and 
not the word “shall” which prima facie shows that the provision is an 
enabling one. Rule 6 of Order 12 must be read with Rule 5 of Order 
8 which is identical to the Proviso to Section 58 of the Evidence Act. 
Reading all the relevant provisions together, it is manifest that the 
court is not bound to grant relief to the plaintiff only on the basis 
of admission of the defendant. (See: Sher Bahadur v. Mohd. Amin, 
AIR 1929 Lah 569)
32.	 In the leading decision of Throp v. Holdsworth, Jessel, reported 
in (1876)3 Ch D 637 (640) M.R. said: “This rule enables the plaintiff 
or the defendant to get rid of so much of the action, as to which 
there is no controversy.”
33.	 In Uttam Singh (Supra) the plaintiff bank filed a suit for recovery 
of a large sum of money against the defendant. It also filed an 
application under Order 12, Rule 6 for judgment upon admission in 
respect of part of claim. The application was allowed and a decree 
was passed. An appeal against the decree was also dismissed 
by the High Court. The defendant approached this Court. It was 
contended before this Court by the defendant that (i) Rule 6 of Order 
12 covers only those admissions made in pleadings; (ii) the effect of 
the admissions can only be considered at the trial of the suit; and 
(iii) the provision of Order 12, Rule 6 must be read along with the 
provisions of Order 8 and the court should call upon the plaintiff to 
prove its case independent of so called admissions.
34.	 Negativing the contentions and referring to the object of Order 12, 
Rule 6, the Court observed that “where a claim is admitted, the 
court has jurisdiction to enter a judgment for the plaintiff and to 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
471
Rajiv Ghosh v. Satya Naryan Jaiswal
pass a decree on admitted claim. The scope of Rule 6 should not 
be narrowed down where a party applying for judgment is entitled to 
succeed on a plain admission of the opposite party. The admission 
by the defendant was clear, unambiguous, unequivocal and 
unconditional. The courts below were, therefore, right in decreeing 
the suit of the plaintiff.” 
35.	 The words “or otherwise” are wide enough to include all cases of 
admissions made in the pleadings or de hors the pleadings. Under 
Rule 6, as originally enacted, it was held that the words “or otherwise” 
without the words “in writing” used in Rule 1 showed that a judgment 
could be given upon oral or verbal admission also. [See: Beeny, re, 
(1894) 1 Ch D 499] The Amendment Act of 1976, however, made the 
position clear stating that such admissions may be “in the pleading 
or otherwise” and “whether orally or in writing”. Thus, after the 
amendment in Rule 6, the admissions are not confined to Rule 1 or 
Rule 4 of Order 6, but are of general application. Such admissions 
may be express or implied (constructive); may be in writing or oral; 
or may be before the institution of the suit, after the suit is brought 
or during the pendency of proceedings. 
36.	 A Division Bench of the Delhi High Court very correctly laid down the 
following interpretation of the provision of O. 12, R. 6, CPC, in the 
decision of ITDC Limited v. Chander Pal Sood and Son, reported in 
(2000) 84 DLT 337 (DB): (2000 AIHC 1990):
“Order 12, R. 6 of Code gives a very wide discretion to 
the Court. Under this rule the Court may at any stage of 
the suit either on the application of any party or of its own 
motion and without determination of any other question 
between the parties can make such order giving such 
judgment as it may think fit on the basis of admission of 
a fact made in the pleadings or otherwise whether orally 
or in writing.”
37.	 The use of the expression ‘otherwise’ in the aforesaid context came 
to be interpreted by the High Court. Considering the expression the 
Court interpreted the said word by stating that it permits the Court 
to pass judgment on the basis of the statement made by the parties 
not only on the pleadings but also dehors the pleadings i.e. either 
in any document or even in the statement recorded in the Court. If 
one of the parties’ statement is recorded under O. 10, Rr. 1 and 2 
472
Supreme Court Reports
of the Code of Civil Procedure, the same is also a statement which 
elucidates matters in controversy. Any admission in such statement 
is relevant not only for the purpose of finding out the real dispute 
between the parties but also to ascertain as to whether or not any 
dispute or controversy exists between the parties. Admission if any 
is made by a party in the statement recorded, would be conclusive 
against him and the Court can proceed to pass judgment on the 
basis of the admission made therein.
38.	 Rule 6 of Order XII, before the amendment, allowed judgment on 
admission only on an application by a party. The Law Commission, 
however, suggested that a judgment may be pronounced either on 
an application by a party or even suo motu [See: Throp (supra)]
39.	 This rule authorizes the court to enter a judgment where a claim is 
admitted and to pass a decree on such admitted claim. This can 
be done at any stage. [See: Uttam Singh (supra)]. Thus, a plaintiff 
may move for judgment upon admission by the defendant in his 
written statement at any stage of the suit although he has joined 
issue on the defence.” [See: Brown v. Pearson, (1882) 21 Ch D 
716]. Likewise, a defendant may apply for dismissal of the suit on 
the basis of admission by the plaintiff in rejoinder. 
40.	 The court may, in an appropriate case, give a judgment at an 
interlocutory stage of the proceedings on admission by a party. [See: 
Balraj Taneja v. Sunil Madan, (1999) 8 SCC 396]. But if the case 
involves questions which cannot conveniently be disposed of at a 
motion stage, the court may not give judgment at that stage. [See: 
Simla Wholesale Mart (Supra)]
41.	 Sub-rule (2) of Rule 6 as inserted by the Code of Civil Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 requires the court to draw up a decree in 
accordance with the judgment on admission. Sub-rule (2) is thus 
consequential and logical sequence to sub-rule (1). 
42.	 Since the object of sub-rule (1) is to enable the plaintiff to get judgment 
on admission of the defendant to the extent of such admission, he 
must get the benefit thereof immediately without waiting for the 
determination of “non-admitted claim”. Sub-rule (2) makes it imperative 
for the court to draw up a decree in terms of judgment on admission 
which can be executed by the plaintiff.” [See: Uttam Singh (supra)]. 
In such cases, there may be two decrees; (i) in respect of admitted 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
473
Rajiv Ghosh v. Satya Naryan Jaiswal
claim; and (ii) in respect of “non-admitted” or contested claim. [See: 
Bai Chanchal v. United Bank of India, AIR 1971 SC 1081].
43.	 A decree under Rule 6 may be either preliminary or final. [See: 
Sivalinga v. Narayani, AIR 1946 Mad 151]
44.	 We are of the view having regard to the clear and unequivocal 
admission made by the defendant in his written statement, the High 
Court committed no error much less any error of law in decreeing 
the suit applying Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC.
45.	 At this stage we should take note of the submission canvassed by the 
learned counsel that the petitioner is not governed by the provisions 
of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1997 and therefore the 
entire discussion as regards Section 2(g) of the Act, 1997 was 
unnecessary. In other words, the attempt on the part of the learned 
counsel was to persuade us to accept the argument that if Section 
2(g) of the Act, 1997 is not applicable then in such circumstances 
the petitioner has a right to continue in occupation of the premises 
in question as the legal heir of the original tenant.
46.	 We are afraid, we are not impressed with the submission canvassed 
by the learned counsel as noted above. We take notice of the fact 
that this point was never raised or argued before the High Court. We 
wonder if it was at all argued even before the trial court. We called 
upon the learned counsel to point out from the reply filed by the 
petitioner to the application filed by the respondent under Order XII 
Rule 6 of the CPC that this point was raised before the High Court. 
There is nothing in the objections/reply of the petitioner to indicate 
that such contention was ever raised. On the contrary, para 9 of the 
reply filed by the petitioner-herein which we have incorporated in 
para 11 of this order clinches the issue. In para 9 of the reply to the 
application filed by the plaintiff under Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC 
it is stated thus:-
“Moreover, the defendant filed an application u/s 7(1) & 
7(2) of the W.B.P.T. Act before this Ld. Court for payment of 
current rent as well as arrears rent if any due and payable 
and those applications are pending before this Ld. Court.”
If according to the petitioner the provisions of the Act, 1997 are 
not applicable then what was the good reason for him to file the 
application under Sections 7(1) & (2) of the Act, 1997 respectively.
474
Supreme Court Reports
47.	 In view of the aforesaid, this petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
48.	 Registry shall circulate one copy each of this order to all the High 
Courts and the High Courts in turn shall circulate the order in their 
respective District judiciary.
Result of the case: Petition dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey