[2025] 1 S.C.R. 610 : 2025 INSC 54
NBCC (India) Ltd. 
v. 
The State of West Bengal & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 3705 of 2024)
10 January 2025
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha* and  
Pankaj Mithal, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether an MSME cannot make a reference to the Facilitation 
Council for dispute resolution under Section 18 of the Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 if it is not 
registered under Section 8 of the 2006 Act before the execution 
of the contract with the buyer.
Headnotes†
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 – 
s.18 – MSME seeks to refer the dispute that it has with the 
buyer regarding payment of its dues to the Facilitation Council 
for arbitration u/s. 18 of the Act – The appellant opposes this 
prayer by contending that ‘any party’ can only be a ‘supplier’ 
and that supplier should have been registered u/s. 8 of the 
Act even before execution of the contract, if not, the reference 
is impermissible:
Held: After examining the text, context, and purpose of the 
Act, this Court arrives at the decision that s.18 is not restrictive 
and is a remedy for the resolution of disputes, and as such, it 
is kept open-ended to enable ‘any party’ to refer the dispute to 
seek redressal – The submission that ‘any party to a dispute’ is 
confined to a ‘supplier’ who has filed a memorandum u/s. 8 of the 
Act is rejected – The issue(s) that have arisen in the decisions 
of this Court in Silpi Industries v. Kerala State Road Transport 
Corporation and Gujarat State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited v. 
Mahakali Foods Private Limited were very different from the issue 
that has arisen for consideration in the instant case – Though it 
is possible for this Court to follow the precedents to arrive at the 
* Author
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
611
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
conclusion that the judgments in the case of Silpi Industries and 
Mahakali Foods coupled with the subsequent orders in Vaishno 
Enterprises and M/s Nitesh Estates cannot be considered to be 
binding precedents on the issue that has arisen for consideration, 
taking into account the compelling need to ensure clarity and 
certainty about the applicable precedents on the subject, it is 
deemed appropriate to refer this appeal to a three Judge Bench. 
[Paras 1.1, 29]
Interpretation of Statutes – Interpretation of Statutory Remedies 
by Constitutional Courts:
Held: When a statutory remedy falls for consideration, it is the duty 
of the Constitutional Court to adopt an interpretation which would 
not only reduce the hiatus between a right and a remedy, but also 
to ensure that the remedy is effective – If rights are recognition of 
a claim, remedies are their actualization – While the rights regime 
receives broad recognition under constitutional framework, it is 
imperative that remedies must keep pace and be strengthened – 
One of the core functions of the higher judiciary is to bridge the 
gap between rights and remedies, and this would immediately give 
rise to the legislative, executive and judicial obligations for their 
provision, implementation, and declaration, respectively. [Para 10]
Justice – Access to justice – Right to an effective judicial 
remedy:
Held: The right to an effective judicial remedy is an integral 
part of access to justice – An effective judicial remedy under a 
constitutional scheme must be (i) accessible, (ii) affordable, (iii) 
expeditious and (iv) cohesive – Accessibility requires the remedy 
to be easily available, physically and informationally – Affordability 
is an aspect that is related to the cost of availing the remedy, 
it must be at a reasonable price with a provision for legal aid, 
if need be – The expeditious nature of a remedy is concerned 
with the quick disposal of the case and abhors unreasonable 
delays – Yet another facet of effective judicial remedy is its 
cohesiveness – The cohesiveness of a remedy simply means 
that a person must have one specified forum for the redressal 
of grievances. [Para 10.1]
612
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006  – 
s.18 – Words employed “any party to a dispute” – Golden 
Rule of Interpretation:
Held: The text of Section 18 is clear and categoric – The words 
employed herein are “any party to a dispute” – The age-old 
principle, referred to as the Golden Rule of Interpretation, is 
that “words of a statute have to be read and understood in their 
natural, ordinary and popular sense” – The choice of the words 
‘any party to a dispute’ in Section 18 of the Act is deliberate – If 
the Parliament had intended that ‘any party’ must be confined only 
to a “supplier”, or even a buyer, which expression is also defined, 
it would as well have used that or those very expressions – The 
Court cannot substitute the expression “any party” with “supplier” 
and change the text and, consequently, the scope and ambit of 
Section 18 altogether. [Para 14.1]
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 – 
s.18 – Purpose and Object:
Held: Apart from the text and context in which Section 18 of the 
Act employs the expression “any party to the dispute”, it is also 
to be seen that the section is provisioning a remedy for resolution 
of disputes – This remedy is provided by the statute, not by an 
agreement between the parties – It is therefore, necessary to keep 
it unrestricted and open-ended, enabling any party to a dispute 
to access the remedy – When statutory provision incorporation 
remedies for resolution of disputes fall for consideration, 
constitutional courts must interpret such remedies in a manner 
that would effectuate access to justice. [Para 14.3]
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act,  
2006 – s.18 – Whether filing of memorandum u/s.8 is  
mandatory:
Held: Section 8(1)(a) provides that, “a micro or a small enterprise 
may, at his discretion” and even a medium enterprise engaged 
in providing or rendering services, also “may at his discretion” 
file a memorandum with the authority as may be specified by the 
Government – Further, sub-section (4) of Section 8 relates to micro 
or small enterprises, the State Government shall by notification, 
specify the authority with which such micro or small enterprise 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
613
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
may file a memorandum – Considering the choice and discretion 
specifically provided to these enterprises, it becomes very clear 
that there is no mandatory prescription of filing a memorandum. 
[Para 14.5]
Case Law Cited
Silpi Industries v. Kerala State Road Transport Corporation [2021] 
3 SCR 1044 : (2021) 18 SCC 790; Gujarat State Civil Supplies 
Corporation Limited v. Mahakali Foods Private Limited [2022] 19 
SCR 1094 : (2023) 6 SCC 401 – distinguished.
Kone Elevator India Private Limited  v.  State of Tamil Nadu 
[2014] 5 SCR 912 : (2014) 7 SCC 1; Shanti Conductors Private  
Ltd. v. Assam State Electricity Board [2019] 1 SCR 489 : (2019) 
19 SCC 529; Anita Kushwaha v. Pushap Sudan [2016] 9 SCR 
560  : (2016) 8 SCC 509; State of Andhra Pradesh  v.  Linde 
(India) Ltd. [2020] 5 SCR 838 : (2020) 16 SCC 335; Grid Corpn. 
of Orissa Ltd. v. Eastern Metals & Ferro Alloys [2010] 10 SCR 
779 : (2011) 11 SCC 334; GE T&D India Ltd. v. Reliable Engg. 
Projects & Mktg., 2017 SCC OnLine Del 6978; Re: Gujarat 
State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd. v. Mahakali Foods Pvt. Ltd. 
[2022] 19 SCR 1094 : (2023) 6 SCC 401; Shanti Conductors 
(P) Ltd. v. Assam SEB [2019] 1 SCR 489 : (2019) 19 SCC 529 : 
(2020) 4 SCC (Civ) 409; Vaishno Enterprises v. Hamilton Medical 
AG and Anr. [2022] 1 SCR 771 : 2022 SCC OnLine SC 355;  
M/s Nitesh Estates Ltd. v. Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation 
Council of Haryana & Ors., C.A. No. 5276/2022@ SLP (C) No. 
26682/2018; State of U.P.  v.  Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. 
[1991] 3 SCR 64 : (1991) 4 SCC 139; Municipal Corporation 
of Delhi v. Gurnam Kaur [1988] Supp. 2 SCR 929 : (1989) 1 
SCC 101; Arnit Das v. State of Bihar [2000] Supp. 1 SCR 69 : 
(2000) 5 SCC 488; Union of India v. All Gujarat Federation of Tax 
Consultants (2006) 13 SCC 473; Francis Stanly v. Intelligence 
Officer, Narcotic Control Bureau, Thiruvananthapuram [2006] 
Supp. 10 SCR 977 : (2006) 13 SCC 210; Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Ltd.  v.  P. Kesavan [2004] 3 SCR 811 : (2004) 9 
SCC 772; Vishnu Dutt Sharma v. Manju Sharma [2009] 3 SCR 
891 : (2009) 6 SCC 379; Chandigarh Housing Board v. Narinder 
Kaur Makol [2000] Supp. 1 SCR 487 : (2000) 6 SCC 415; 
Allen v. Flood (1893) AC 1 – referred to.
614
Books and Periodicals Cited
‘2024 Theme: MSMEs and the SDGs’ (United Nations) (2024);  
‘A microscope on small businesses: The productivity opportunity by 
country’ (McKinsey Global Institute) (July 22, 2024); ‘The MSME 
Revolution: Transforming India’s Economic Landscape’ (Press 
Information Bureau) (Dec 23, 2024); ‘MSMEs: The Backbone of 
India’s Economic Future’ (Invest India); ‘Women-led Enterprises’ 
(Lok Sabha Digital Library) (June 28, 2024); ‘Participation of 
Females in MSMEs’ (Lok Sabha Digital Library) (Feb 8, 2024); 
‘Economic Survey 2023-24’; Report of the Expert Committee on 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (June, 2019); ‘Commentary 
on Constitution of India’ (9th Edition, Vol. IX).
List of Acts
Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993; Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006; Small 
Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993; Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996; Limitation Act, 1963; Constitution of 
India.
List of Keywords
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006; 
MSME; Facilitation Council; Golden Rule of Interpretation; 
Interpretation of Statutes; Precedent making; Decision-making; 
Section 18 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development 
Act, 2006; Article 141 of the Constitution.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3705 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 18.05.2022 of the High Court 
at Calcutta in APO No. 11 of 2022
Appearances for Parties
Gopal Sankaranarayanan, Sr. Adv., Nagarkatti Kartik Uday,  
Ms. Shivani Vij, Advs. for the Appellant.
Ms. Madhumita Bhattacharjee, Ms. Debarati Sadhu, Ms. Srija 
Choudhury, Anant, Sudarshan Rajan, Satyam Dwivedi, Mahesh 
Kumar, Roshan Santhalia, Advs. for the Respondents.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
615
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha, J.
Table of Contents*
1.
Introduction .........................................................................
2
2.
Facts ...................................................................................
4
3.
Decisions of the Single Judge and the Division 
Bench ..................................................................................
6
4.
Submissions .........................................................................
7
5.
Issue for our consideration .............................................
8
6.
The repealed Interest on Delayed Payments to Small 
Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993 
and the judgment in Shanti Conductors v. Assam State 
Electricity Board ................................................................
8
7.
The Micro, Small and Medium Industry in our 
Country ................................................................................
12
8.
Interpretation of Statutory Remedies by Constitutional 
Courts ..................................................................................
15
9.
Statutory Scheme of the MSMED Act, 2006 ...................
17
10. Whether registration is a necessary precondition to 
referring a dispute under Section 18 of the Act ............
20
11. Re: Silpi Industries v. Kerala State Road Transport 
Corporation .........................................................................
31
12. Re: Gujarat State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd. v. 
Mahakali Foods Pvt. Ltd. ................................................
35
13. Conclusion and reference to larger Bench ....................
42
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.
616
1.	
Introduction: The old value of ‘Small is beautiful’ 1 has not lost 
its relevance. Recognising the contribution of micro, small and 
medium enterprises towards economic development, the United 
Nations declared June 27th as MSME day. MSMEs are said to be 
the backbone of many economies, including India. This resonates 
with the statement of the father of our nation, Mahatma Gandhi, 
declaring that the ‘salvation of India lies in cottage and small scale 
industries’. The Parliament enacted the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises Development Act, 20062 for facilitating the promotion 
and development of the enterprises by creating certain rights and 
duties and establishing a Board, Advisory Committee, and Facilitation 
Council. Importantly, the Act provided a mechanism for dispute 
resolution.
1.1	 The MSME before us has a simple prayer. It seeks to refer the 
dispute that it has with the buyer regarding payment of its dues 
to the Facilitation Council for arbitration under Section 18 of 
the Act, which provides that “any party to a dispute may, with 
regard to any amount due under section 17, make a reference 
to the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council”. The 
appellant opposes this prayer by contending that ‘any party’ 
can only be a ‘supplier’ and that supplier should have been 
registered under Section 8 of the Act even before execution 
of the contract, if not, the reference is impermissible. The High 
Court did not answer this question. Instead, it permitted the 
parties to raise such objections before the Arbitral Tribunal. 
The buyer is in appeal before us, raising the same question 
as a jurisdictional issue.
1.2	 We have examined the text, context, and purpose of the Act to 
arrive at the decision that Section 18 is not restrictive and is a 
remedy for the resolution of disputes, and as such, it is kept 
open-ended to enable ‘any party’ to refer the dispute to seek 
1	
E.F. Schumacher, ‘Small Is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as if People Mattered’ (1973) “We need 
the freedom of lots and lots of small, autonomous units, and, at the same time, the orderliness of large-
scale, possibly global, unity and co-ordination. When it comes to action, we obviously need small units, 
because action is a highly personal affair, and one cannot be in touch with more than a very limited 
number of persons at any one time.”
2	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
617
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
redressal. For the reasons to follow, we rejected the submission 
that ‘any party to a dispute’ is confined to a ‘supplier’ who has 
filed a memorandum under Section 8 of the Act. We have also 
explained that the issue(s) that have arisen in the decisions 
of this Court in Silpi Industries v. Kerala State Road Transport 
Corporation3 and Gujarat State Civil Supplies Corporation 
Limited v. Mahakali Foods Private Limited4 were very different 
from the issue that has arisen for our consideration. However, 
for clarity and legal certainty, we have directed the appeal be 
placed before the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India for referring 
the matter to a bench of three Judges for an authoritative 
pronouncement. 
1.3	 We will first state the necessary facts before considering the 
submissions, followed by our reasons and conclusions.
2.	
Facts: The appellant, National Buildings Construction Corporation, 
granted four work orders between July 2015 to August 2016 to 
M/s Saket Infra Developers Private Limited, respondent No. 4 5 for 
undertaking construction work at different places in West Bengal. 
Pursuant to the work orders, contracts were executed on 27.08.2015, 
17.11.2015, 28.07.2016 and 20.08.2016. The Enterprise filed a 
memorandum under Section 8 of the Act on 19.11.2016 as a ‘small 
enterprise’. Thereafter, on 15.09.2017, the appellant also executed 
a fifth contract in favour of the Enterprise. 
2.1	 Work is said to have commenced on various dates, supplies 
continued, and bills were raised from time to time by the 
Enterprise, even after filing of the memorandum under Section 8 
of the Act. The Table showing dates of the work orders, contract 
and particulars of the work awarded and details of bills raised 
after registration is as under:
3	
[2021] 3 SCR 1044 : (2021) 18 SCC 790, hereinafter referred to, in short as Silpi Industries.
4	
[2022] 19 SCR 1094 : (2023) 6 SCC 401, hereinafter referred to, in short as Mahakali Foods.
5	
Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Enterprise’.
618
S. 
No.
Dates 
of Work 
Orders
Dates of 
Construction 
Contracts
Bills raised 
after 
Registration on 
19.11.2016
1.
Contract-I
30.07.2015
27.08.2015
Office Building 
for National Jute 
Board, Rajarhat, 
Kolkata
10 Bills for 34.71 
crores
2.
Contract-II
26.10.2015
17.11.2015
Residential 
Quarters for ISI, 
Kolkata
8 Bills for 14.18 
crores
3.
Contract-III
19.01.2016
28.07.2016
ITI Campus, 
Darjeeling
10 Bills for 10.49 
crores
4.
Contract-IV
19.08.2016
20.08.2016
Regional Centre for 
Lalit Kala Academy, 
Kolkata
8 Bills for 12.46 
crores
19.11.2016
Registration of Respondent No. 4 as 
Small Undertaking
5.
Contract-V
15.09.2017
11.10.2017
MSTC Office, 
Rajarhat, Kolkata
5 Bills for 15.72 
crores
2.2	 During the subsistence of the contract, disputes arose between 
the parties in connection with all five contracts. It may be 
mentioned here itself that, with respect to the fifth contract, 
the Enterprise instituted a commercial suit [(Comm.) No. 229 
of 2021] before the High Court of Delhi, which is said to be 
pending consideration. However, this fact does not have any 
bearing on the issues before this Court.
2.3	 Seeking resolution of disputes, on 28.03.2019, the Enterprise 
made a reference under Section 18 of the Act for recovery of 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
619
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
the amounts due to it to the West Bengal State Micro and Small 
Enterprises Facilitation Council6. The Facilitation Council initiated 
action, and with the failure of the conciliation proceedings under 
Section 18(2) of the Act, the dispute was referred to arbitration 
under Section 18(3) on 19.01.2021. A further notice of the 
arbitral proceedings was also issued, and it was received by 
the appellant on 30.09.2021.
2.4	 The appellant objected to the Facilitation Council entertaining 
the reference, firstly on the ground that the Enterprise was 
not registered before the execution of the contracts and, as 
such, the Facilitation Council does not have jurisdiction under 
Section 18. Secondly, it was also argued that the subject matter 
of the contract relates to the execution of the works contracts, 
which falls outside the scope and ambit of the Act. Carrying 
these objections further, the appellant filed a Writ Petition under 
Article 226 of the Constitution of India before the High Court 
of Calcutta, raising the jurisdictional question of the Facilitation 
Council entertaining the reference. 
3.	
Decisions of the Single Judge and the Division Bench: The 
learned Single Judge dismissed the Writ Petition on 16.12.2021 by 
simply holding that “the question of jurisdiction can be raised before 
the Arbitral Tribunal, which shall decide the same before entering into 
other questions.” The decision of the Single Judge was challenged 
unsuccessfully before the Division Bench of the High Court by the 
order impugned before us. The Division Bench also referred the 
decision of this Court in Kone Elevator India Private Limited v. State 
of Tamil Nadu7 to hold that a works contract is an indivisible contract 
and also that the Act, being a special legislation, overrides other 
statutes. The Division Bench agreed with the finding of the Single 
Judge that all objections, including those relating to maintainability, 
can be raised and contested before the arbitrator. Thus, the appellant 
is in appeal before us.
4.	
Submissions: Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned senior counsel, 
appearing for the appellant, challenged the jurisdiction of the 
Facilitation Council in entertaining the reference under Section 18 of 
6	
Hereinafter referred to as the ‘Facilitation Council’. 
7	
[2014] 5 SCR 912 : (2014) 7 SCC 1
620
the Act by the Enterprise for the simple reason that it registered itself 
after the contracts were executed and not before. His submission 
is based on the decision of this Court in Silpi Industries (supra) and 
Mahakali Foods (supra). Though the impugned decision of the High 
Court was on 18.05.2022, almost a year after the judgment of this 
Court in Silpi Industries (supra), it has not taken note of the judgment 
of this Court. Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan also referred to certain 
subsequent orders of this Court, which we will be examining while 
considering the issue. 
4.1	 Ms. Madhumita Bhattacharjee and Mr. Roshan Santhalia, 
learned counsels for respondents, opposed the appellant’s 
arguments and contended that these questions can always be 
raised before the Arbitral Tribunal as directed by the Single as 
well as the Division Bench of the High Court.
5.	
Issue for our consideration: The question of law for our consideration 
is whether an MSME cannot make a reference to the Facilitation 
Council for dispute resolution under Section 18 of the Act if it is not 
registered under Section 8 of the Act before the execution of the 
contract with the buyer.
6.	
Before we examine the provisions of the Act and the ratio of the 
judgment of this Court in Silpi Industries (supra) and Mahakali Foods 
(supra), it is necessary to take note of the statute (repealed Act) that 
preceded the Act and also the important judgment of this Court in 
Shanti Conductors Private Ltd. v. Assam State Electricity Board,8 
which also has a direct bearing on the decision in Silpi Industries 
(supra) and for interpreting the provisions of the Act.
7.	
The repealed Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and 
Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993 9 and the judgment in 
Shanti Conductors v. Assam State Electricity Board : The decision 
of this Court in Shanti Conductors (supra), a three-Judge Bench 
Judgment, was necessitated because of the difference of opinion 
between two Judges. The relevant facts of Shanti Conductors (supra) 
are that the Small-Scale Industry therein entered into a contract for 
supply of goods and services to the buyer before the said 1993 
8	
[2019] 1 SCR 489 : (2019) 19 SCC 529, hereinafter referred to, in short as Shanti Conductors.
9	
Hereinafter referred to as the repealed statute.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
621
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
repealed statute came into force. However, the supplies under the 
contract were rendered after the said statute came into force. Of 
the seven questions of law that were formulated by the three-judge 
bench, the first two questions, relevant to our purpose, are extracted 
for ready reference. It is necessary to mention here that filing of a 
memorandum by any MSME was never an issue there, as, in fact, 
there was no such requirement under the repealed statute. The 
issues in Shanti Conductors (supra) are as follows: 
“34.1.(1) Whether the 1993 Act is not applicable when the 
contract for supply was entered into between the parties 
prior to the enforcement of the Act i.e., 23-9-1992?
34.2. (2) Whether in the event it is found that the Act is 
applicable also with regard to contract entered prior to the 
1993 Act in pursuance of which contract, supplies were 
made after the enforcement of the 1993 Act, the 1993 Act 
can be said to have retrospective operation?”
7.1	 The repealed statute comprised of 11 provisions, of which Section 
3 related to the liability of the buyer to make payment, Section 4 
related to the date and rate of interest payable, Section 5 related 
to the liability to pay compound interest, and Section 6 related 
to the right of recovery of the amount payable to the supplier.
7.2	 Having considered the statutory scheme, the Court came to 
the conclusion that the incidence of applicability of the liability 
under that statute is supply of goods or rendering of services. 
The Court categorically held that the liability of the buyer for 
payment under the Act arises even if the agreement of sale is 
prior to the Act (repealed) but if the supplies were made after 
the Act.
7.3	 Answering the first question, this Court held as under: -
“61. We have noticed above that the incidence of 
applicability of the liability under the Act is supply of goods 
or rendering of service. In event the supply of goods 
and rendering of services is subsequent to the Act, can 
liability to pay interest on delayed payment be denied 
on the ground that agreement in pursuance of which 
supplies were made were entered prior to enforcement of 
the Act? Entering into an agreement being not expressly 
622
or impliedly referred to in the statutory scheme as an 
incident for fastening of the liability, making the date of 
agreement as date for imposition of liability does not 
conform to the statutory scheme. This can be illustrated 
by taking an example. There are two small scale industries 
which received orders for supply of materials. ‘A’ received 
such orders prior to the enforcement of the Act and ‘B’ 
received the order after the enforcement of the Act. Both 
supplied the goods subsequent to enforcement of the Act 
and became entitled to receive payment after the supply, 
on or before the day agreed upon between the supplier 
and buyer or before the appointed day. Payments were 
not made both to ‘A’ and ‘B’ as required by Section 3. 
Can the buyer who has received supplies from supplier 
‘A’ escape from his statutory liability to make payment of 
interest under Section 3 read with Section 4? The answer 
has to be No. Two suppliers who supply goods after the 
enforcement of the Act, become entitled to receive payment 
after the enforcement of the Act one supplier cannot 
be denied the benefit of the statutory protection on the 
pretext that the agreement in his case was entered prior 
to enforcement of the Act. When the date of agreement 
is not referred as material or incidence for fastening the 
liability, by no judicial interpretation the said date can be 
treated as a date for fastening of the liability. The 1993 Act 
being beneficial legislation enacted to protect small scale 
industries and statutorily ensure by mandatory provision for 
payment of interest on the outstanding money, accepting 
the interpretation as put by the learned counsel for the 
Board that the day of agreement has to be subsequent to 
the enforcement of the Act, the entire beneficial protection 
of the Act shall be defeated. The existence of statutory 
liability depends on the statutory factors as enumerated 
in Section 3 and Section 4 of the 1993 Act. Factor for 
liability to make payment under Section 3 being the supplier 
supplies any goods or renders services to the buyer, the 
liability of buyer cannot be denied on the ground that the 
agreement entered into between the parties for supply 
was prior to the 1993 Act. To hold that liability of buyer 
for payment shall arise only when agreement for supply 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
623
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
was entered into subsequent to enforcement of the Act, it 
shall be adding words to Section 3 which is not permissible 
under the principles of statutory construction.
62. We, thus, are of the view that the judgments in 
Purbanchal Cables & Conductors,10 Assam Small Scale 
Industries11 and Shakti Tubes Ltd.12 which held that the 
1993 Act shall be applicable only when the agreement 
to sale/contract was entered into prior/subsequent to the 
enforcement of the Act, does not lay down the correct law. 
We accept the submission of the learned counsel for the 
appellants that even if agreement of sale is entered into 
prior to enforcement of the Act, liability to make payment 
under Section 3 and liability to make payment of interest 
under Section 4 shall arise if supplies are made subsequent 
to the enforcement of the Act.”
(emphasis supplied)
7.4	 The ratio of the decision in Shanti Conductors can be formulated 
as follows: 
i)	
Even if contracts are entered into before the commencement 
of the repealed statute, the liability to make payment under 
Section 3, and to pay interest thereon under Sections 4 
and 5 and to recover the amount under Section 6 will arise 
if the supplies are made subsequent to the enforcement 
of the statute. The incidence of liability under the repealed 
statute is ‘supply of goods or rendering of services’, 
ii)	
when the date of contract is neither referred to nor made 
an incident for fastening the liability under the statute, by 
way of judicial interpretation, courts cannot treat the said 
date as the date for fastening the liability. The existence of 
the statutory liability depends on the language employed 
in Sections 3 to 6 of the statute, 
iii)	
to hold that the liability of the buyer to make payment shall 
arise only when the contract for supply was entered into 
10	
Purbanchal Cables & Conductors (P) Ltd. v. Assam SEB (2012) 7 SCC 462
11	
Assam Small Scale Industries Development Corpn. Ltd. v. J.D. Pharmaceuticals (2005) 13 SCC 19
12	
Shakti Tubes Ltd. v. State of Bihar (2009) 7 SCC 673
624
subsequent to the enforcement of the Act will defeat the 
purpose and object of the beneficial legislation intended 
to protect small-scale and ancillary industrial undertakings.
8.	
The Micro, Small and Medium Industry in our Country: After 
the repeal of the 1993 Act, the present Act came into force with 
effect from 02.10.2006. The Act is a comprehensive legislation that 
recognises and seeks to rejuvenate the importance of MSMEs, whose 
importance and contribution is accepted in contemporary economies 
across the globe, and accredited by the United Nations13. United 
Nations, commenting on the significance of MSMEs observes that:
“MSMEs help reduce levels of poverty through job creation 
and economic growth; they are key drivers of employment, 
decent jobs and entrepreneurship for women, youth and 
groups in vulnerable situations. They are the majority of 
the world’s food producers and play critical roles in closing 
the gender gap as they ensure women’s full and effective 
participation in the economy and in society”.
8.1	 In the statement of object and reasons of the Act, it is mentioned 
that “many Expert Groups and Committees appointed by the 
Government from time to time as well as small scale industry 
sector itself has emphasised the need for a comprehensive 
central enactment to provide an appropriate framework for the 
sector to facilitate its growth and development, emergence 
of a large service sector assisting the small scale industry in 
the last two decades also warrants a composite view of the 
sector encompassing both industrial units and related service 
entities. The world over, the emphasis has now been shifted 
from industries to Enterprises.” 
8.2	 The rights, incentives and remedies provisioned under the 
Act are the backbone of our economy. Statistics indicate that 
MSMEs provide employment to 62% of the country’s workforce, 
contribute 30% to India’s GDP,14 and account for around 45% of 
13	
‘2024 Theme: MSMEs and the SDGs’ (United Nations) <https://www.un.org/en/observances/micro-
small-medium-businesses-day> (2024).
14	
‘A microscope on small businesses: The productivity opportunity by country’ (McKinsey Global Institute) 
<https://www.mckinsey.com/mgi/our-research/a-microscope-on-small-businesses-the-productivity-
opportunity-by-country#/> (May 29, 2024); ‘Contribution Of MSMEs to the GDP’ (Press Information 
Bureau) <https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2035073> (July 22, 2024). 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
625
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
India’s total exports15. The Indian MSME sector is projected to 
grow to $1 trillion by 202816. Moreover, MSMEs play a crucial 
role in promoting rural development, women’s employment, 
and inclusive growth. 19.5% of total MSMEs17 and 70% of 
informal micro-enterprises are owned by women18. There is 
undoubtedly a global consensus regarding the indispensable 
importance of MSMEs.
8.3	 However, while the United Nations and even the Expert Groups 
and Committees appointed by the Government from time to time 
have underscored the importance of MSMEs, and that has led 
to the Parliament enacting the present legislation, MSMEs in 
India have been facing many challenges which are reflected 
in their performance. A recent report records that, “MSMEs in 
India contribute 30% to value-addition and 62% to employment”, 
as against “49% and 77%, in other emerging economies”.19 
The 2023-2024 Economic Survey also recorded the concerns 
faced by MSME’s.20 
9.	
It is in the above-referenced context that we need to comprehend, 
interpret and construct the remedies contemplated under the Act.
10.	 Interpretation of Statutory Remedies by Constitutional Courts: 
When a statutory remedy falls for consideration, it is the duty of the 
Constitutional Court to adopt an interpretation which would not only 
reduce the hiatus between a right and a remedy, but also to ensure 
that the remedy is effective. If rights are recognition of a claim, 
15	
‘The MSME Revolution: Transforming India’s Economic Landscape’ (Press Information Bureau) <https://
pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2087361> (Dec 23, 2024).
16	
‘MSMEs: The Backbone of India’s Economic Future’ (Invest India) <https://www.investindia.gov.in/team-
india-blogs/msmes-backbone-indias-economic-future> (June 28, 2024).
17	
‘Women-led Enterprises’ (Lok Sabha Digital Library) <https://eparlib.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2502792/ 
1/AU3648.pdf> (Aug 10, 2023). 
18	
‘’Participation of Females in MSMEs’ (Lok Sabha Digital Library) <https://eparlib.nic.in/bitstream/ 
123456789/2974207/1/AU1128.pdf> (Feb 8, 2024). 
19	
‘A microscope on small businesses: The productivity opportunity by country’ (McKinsey Global Institute) 
<https://www.mckinsey.com/mgi/our-research/a-microscope-on-small-businesses-the-productivity-
opportunity-by-country#/> (May 29, 2024).
20	
‘Economic Survey 2023-24’ <https://www.indiabudget.gov.in/economicsurvey/doc/echapter.pdf> (2024) 
“Licensing, Inspection, and Compliance requirements that MSMEs have to deal with, imposed particularly 
by sub-national governments, hold them back from growing to their potential and being job creators of 
substance…Further, many MSMEs struggle to secure the necessary funds to start, operate, or expand 
their business due to a variety of reasons including lack of collateral or credit history, high interest rates, 
complex documentation requirements, and long processing times, etc.” (emphasis supplied).
626
remedies are their actualization. While the rights regime receives 
broad recognition under our constitutional framework, it is imperative 
that remedies must keep pace and be strengthened. One of the core 
functions of the higher judiciary is to bridge the gap between rights 
and remedies, and this would immediately give rise to the legislative, 
executive and judicial obligations for their provision, implementation, 
and declaration, respectively. 
10.1	The right to an effective judicial remedy is an integral part 
of access to justice.21 An effective judicial remedy under a 
constitutional scheme must be (i) accessible, (ii) affordable, 
(iii) expeditious and (iv) cohesive. Accessibility requires the remedy 
to be easily available, physically and informationally. Affordability 
is an aspect that is related to the cost of availing the remedy, it 
must be at a reasonable price with a provision for legal aid, if 
need be. The expeditious nature of a remedy is concerned with 
the quick disposal of the case and abhors unreasonable delays. 
Yet another facet of effective judicial remedy is its cohesiveness. 
The cohesiveness of a remedy simply means that a person must 
have one specified forum for the redressal of grievances. This 
requirement must be understood as an antithesis of fragmentation 
of remedies, i.e., a litigant ought not to be forced to approach 
multiple forums for the same cause of action. When a statute 
provisioning a judicial remedy falls for construction, the choice 
of interpretative outcome is not governed so much by the power 
or privileges under the Constitution, but by the constitutional 
duties to create effective judicial remedies in furtherance of the 
right to access to justice. A meaningful interpretation that furthers 
effective judicial access is a constitutional imperative and it is this 
duty that must inform the interpretative criteria. It is in the above 
referred context that we will now examine Section 18 of the Act.
11.	 Statutory Scheme of the MSMED Act, 2006: Sections 2(a), (c), 
(e), (n), 7, 8, 17, 18, 20 and 21, to the extent that they are relevant, 
are reproduced hereinbelow for ready reference.
21	
See, generally, Anita Kushwaha v. Pushap Sudan, (2016) 8 SCC 509 “…Four main facets that, in our 
opinion, constitute the essence of access to justice are: (i) the State must provide an effective adjudicatory 
mechanism; (ii) the mechanism so provided must be reasonably accessible in terms of distance; (iii) the 
process of adjudication must be speedy; and (iv) the litigant’s access to the adjudicatory process must be 
affordable…In order that the right of a citizen to access justice is protected, the mechanism so provided 
must not only be effective but must also be just, fair and objective in its approach...”
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
627
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
“2. Definitions- In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires, -
(a) “Advisory Committee” means the committee constituted 
by the Central Government under sub-section (2) of 
section 7.
(b) …
(c) “Board” means the National Board for Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises established under Section 3;
(e) “Enterprise” means an industrial undertaking or a 
business concern or any other establishment, by whatever 
name called, engaged in the manufacture or production of 
goods, in any manner, pertaining to any industry specified 
in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951) or engaged in providing 
or rendering of any service or services;
7. Classification of enterprises-(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 11B of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951), 
the Central Government may, for the purposes of this 
Act, by notification and having regard to the provisions 
of sub-sections (4) and (5), classify any class or classes 
of enterprises, whether proprietorship, Hindu undivided 
family, association of persons, co-operative society, 
partnership firm, company or undertaking, by whatever 
name called,--
(a) in the case of the enterprises engaged in the 
manufacture or production of goods pertaining to any 
industry specified in the First Schedule to the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951), 
as--
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in plant 
and machinery does not exceed twenty five lakh 
rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in plant 
and machinery is more than twenty-five lakh rupees 
but does not exceed five crore rupees; or
628
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in 
plant and machinery is more than five crore rupees 
but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(b) in the case of the enterprises engaged in providing or 
rendering of services, as--
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in 
equipment does not exceed ten lakh rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in 
equipment is more than ten lakh rupees but does 
not exceed two crore rupees; or
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in 
equipment is more than two crore rupees but does 
not exceed five crore rupees.
(2) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute 
an Advisory Committee consisting of the following 
members, namely:--
(3) …
(4) The Central Government shall, prior to classifying any 
class or classes of enterprises under sub-section (1), 
obtain the recommendations of the Advisory Committee.
15. Liability of buyer to make payment.— Where any 
supplier, supplies any goods or renders any services to 
any buyer, the buyer shall make payment therefor on or 
before the date agreed upon between him and the supplier 
in writing or, where there is no agreement in this behalf, 
before the appointed day: 
Provided that in no case the period agreed upon between 
the supplier and the buyer in writing shall exceed forty-five 
days from the day of acceptance or the day of deemed 
acceptance. 
16. Date from which and rate at which interest is 
payable.—Where any buyer fails to make payment of the 
amount to the supplier, as required under section 15, the 
buyer shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
agreement between the buyer and the supplier or in any 
law for the time being in force, be liable to pay compound 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
629
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
interest with monthly rests to the supplier on that amount 
from the appointed day or, as the case may be, from the 
date immediately following the date agreed upon, at three 
times of the bank rate notified by the Reserve Bank.
“17. Recovery of amount due.- For any goods supplied 
or services rendered by the supplier, the buyer shall be 
liable to pay the amount with interest thereon as provided 
under section 16.
18. Reference to Micro and Small Enterprises 
Facilitation Council- (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
any party to a dispute may, with regard to any amount 
due under section 17, make a reference to the Micro and 
Small Enterprises Facilitation Council.
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1), 
the Council shall either itself conduct conciliation in the 
matter or seek the assistance of any institution or centre 
providing alternate dispute resolution services by making 
a reference to such an institution or centre, for conducting 
conciliation and the provisions of sections 65 to 81 of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall 
apply to such a dispute as if the conciliation was initiated 
under Part III of that Act.
(3) Where the conciliation initiated under sub-section 
(2) is not successful and stands terminated without any 
settlement between the parties, the Council shall either 
itself take up the dispute for arbitration or refer to it any 
institution or centre providing alternate dispute resolution 
services for such arbitration and the provisions of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall then 
apply to the dispute as if the arbitration was in pursuance 
of an arbitration agreement referred to in sub-section (1) 
of section 7 of that Act.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, the Micro and Small Enterprises 
Facilitation Council or the centre providing alternate dispute 
resolution services shall have jurisdiction to act as an 
Arbitrator or Conciliator under this section in a dispute 
630
between the supplier located within its jurisdiction and a 
buyer located anywhere in India.
(5) Every reference made under this section shall be 
decided within a period of ninety days from the date of 
making such a reference.”
20. Establishment of Micro and Small Enterprises 
Facilitation Council.- The State Government shall, 
by notification, establish one or more Micro and Small 
Enterprises Facilitation Councils, at such places, exercising 
such jurisdiction and for such areas, as may be specified 
in the notification.
21. Composition of Micro and Small Enterprises 
Facilitation Council.—
(1) The Micro and Small Enterprise Facilitation Council 
shall consist of not less than three but not more than 
five members to be appointed from among the following 
categories, namely: —… 
11.1	First and foremost, Chapter V of the Act deals with delayed 
payments to micro and small enterprises and specifies the rights, 
liabilities, recovery, and remedies in favour of micro and small 
enterprises. The rights and liabilities are based on the incidence 
of supply made by the micro and small enterprise. To this extent, 
the Act continues the statutory scheme contemplated under the 
repealed statute and, therefore, the principle laid down in Shanti 
Conductors (supra) that the liability of a buyer commences 
from the date of supply and not from the date of execution of 
the agreement or contract, even though the contract was prior 
to coming into force of the Act, continues to apply. Up to this 
point, there seems to be no difficulty. The issue in the present 
case takes a different turn, as explained in the following part.
12.	 Whether registration is a necessary precondition to referring a 
dispute under Section 18 of the Act : The question that we are called 
upon to answer is whether the reference to the Facilitation Council 
under Section 18 of the Act is impermissible if the Enterprise is not 
registered by filing a memorandum under Section 8 of the Act before 
the contract is executed. This issue was not formulated, discussed 
and decided in any other judgment of this Court, including the two 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
631
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
substantive judgments under the Act, i.e. Silpi Industries (supra) 
or Mahakali Foods (supra). In these two judgements, it is worth 
mentioning, such an issue was neither formulated, nor discussed. 
We will explain this in detail while discussing the facts and the ratios 
of these judgements. Apart from the submission of the appellant that 
the issue arising for our consideration is covered by the decision 
in Silpi Industries (supra), as approved in Mahakali Foods (supra), 
on our specific enquiry as to under which provision of the Act an 
Enterprise, which has not filed a memorandum under Section 8 
would be barred from invoking remedies under Section 18 of the 
Act, Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan made the following submission.
13.	 According to him, though Section 18 provides that ‘any party to a 
dispute’ may make a reference to the Facilitation Council, the said 
‘dispute’ must be “with regard to any amount due under Section 17”. 
This requirement, he would submit, takes us to Section 17, which 
provides that, “for any goods supplied or services rendered by the 
supplier, the buyer shall be liable to pay the amount with interest 
thereon under Section 16”. Section 16 is the liability of the buyer 
to pay interest to the ‘supplier’ on the amounts payable to it under 
Section 15 for the supply of goods and rendering of any services. 
The expression ‘supplier’ mentioned in Sections 15, 16 and 17 is 
defined in Section 2(n), as “a micro or small enterprise which has 
filed a memorandum with the authority referred to in sub-section (1) 
of Section 8 and includes,…”. Thus, it was submitted that a ‘supplier’ 
can only be an Enterprise that has filed a memorandum under Section 
8 of the Act. He would conclude by submitting that for supplies made 
prior to such registration, Enterprise cannot avail the remedies under 
Section 18 of the Act. 
14.	 We will now examine the submission in detail, the statutory provisions 
have already been extracted hereinabove.
14.1	Simply the Text: The text of Section 18 is clear and categoric. 
The words employed herein are “any party to a dispute”. The 
text, “any party to a dispute”, cannot be read as a ‘supplier’ by 
adopting a process of interpretation, by first referring to Section 
17, then to Sections 15 and 16 and thereafter, in search of the 
definition of supplier, to Section 2(n) and finally stopping at 
Section 8 to hold that ‘any party to a dispute’ will only be an 
Enterprise which is registered under Section 8 of the Act. This 
632
meaning-making process to metamorphosise the clear text ‘any 
party’ to ‘a supplier’ is not the legal method to understand true 
meaning of words employed by the legislature. The age-old 
principle, referred to as the Golden Rule of Interpretation, is 
that “words of a statute have to be read and understood in their 
natural, ordinary and popular sense”.22 The choice of the words 
‘any party to a dispute’ in Section 18 of the Act is deliberate. 
The legislative device of employing different expressions in 
successive provisions of the same statute is well known and 
intended to effectuate the desired purpose of the Act. If the 
Parliament had intended that ‘any party’ must be confined only to 
a “supplier”, or even a buyer, which expression is also defined, 
it would as well have used that or those very expressions. The 
Court cannot substitute the expression “any party” with “supplier” 
and change the text and, consequently, the scope and ambit 
of Section 18 altogether.
14.2	The context: Mention of Section 17 in Section 18 is only to 
provide context for a reference of dispute. The contextual 
relevance of locating Section 17 in Section 18 is only 
to provide the purpose of reference, not to confine the 
remedy to a registered Enterprise. This is to clarify that the 
reference shall be to adjudicate the dispute arising out of 
a liability of the buyer which is declared under Sections 15 
and 16. 
14.3	The purpose and object of Section 18: Apart from the text and 
context in which Section 18 of the Act employs the expression 
“any party to the dispute”, it is also to be seen that the section 
is provisioning a remedy for resolution of disputes. This remedy 
is provided by the statute, not by an agreement between the 
parties. It is therefore, necessary to keep it unrestricted and 
open-ended, enabling any party to a dispute to access the 
remedy. When statutory provision incorporation remedies for 
resolution of disputes fall for consideration, constitutional courts 
must interpret such remedies in a manner that would effectuate 
access to justice.
22	
State of Andhra Pradesh v. Linde (India) Ltd. (2020) 16 SCC 335; Grid Corpn. of Orissa Ltd. v. Eastern 
Metals & Ferro Alloys (2011) 11 SCC 334. 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
633
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
14.4	The definition clause: We will now examine the sheet anchor 
of Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan’s arguments that a supplier 
is defined under Section 2(n) can only be an Enterprise that 
has filed a memorandum under Section 8 of the Act. For this 
purpose, we will extract the entirety of the definition of supplier 
under Section 2(n) of the Act;
2(n). “supplier” means a micro or small enterprise, 
which has filed a memorandum with the authority 
referred to in sub-section (1) of section 8, and 
includes,— 
(i) the National Small Industries Corporation, 
being a company, registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(ii) the Small Industries Development Corporation 
of a State or a Union territory, by whatever name 
called, being a company registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(iii) any company, co-operative society, trust or 
a body, by whatever name called, registered or 
constituted under any law for the time being in 
force and engaged in selling goods produced 
by micro or small enterprises and rendering 
services which are provided by such enterprises; 
From a plain reading of the Section 2(n), it is clear that the 
definition of a supplier is relatable only to a micro or a small 
enterprise and does not encompass a medium enterprise. 
Supplier not only means a micro or small enterprise, ‘which have 
filed a memorandum with the authority referred to under sub-
Section (1) of Section 8’, but also includes (i)NSIC, (ii) SIDC, and 
the (iii) company, cooperative society, trust or a body engaged 
in selling of goods produced by micro or small enterprise and 
rendered services which are produced by such enterprise. In 
other words, a supplier will also be an entity engaged in selling 
goods or rendering services, produced or provided by a micro 
or small enterprise. All such entities, irrespective of filing of the 
memorandum will be suppliers. Thus, the definition of a supplier 
encompasses not only those who have filed a memorandum, 
634
but also those who have not filed. The reason for keeping the 
definition is not difficult to imagine. This is still an unorganised 
industry, growing, evolving and many of them are at start-up 
levels. The reason for keeping the definition wide is supported 
by an Expert Committee, whose opinion we will refer to in the 
next Section. 
14.5	Filing of memorandum under Section 8 is discretionary: We will 
now examine Section 8 of the Act relied on by the appellants 
to contend that filing of a memorandum by micro, small and 
medium enterprises is mandatory. Section 8 is extracted herein 
for ready reference:
8. Memorandum of micro, small and medium 
enterprises. — (1) Any person who intends to 
establish, —
(a) a micro or small enterprise, may, at his discretion, 
or
(b) a medium enterprise engaged in providing or 
rendering of services may, at his discretion; or
(c) a medium enterprise engaged in the manufacture 
or production of goods pertaining to any industry 
specified in the First Schedule to the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 
1951), shall 
file the memorandum of micro, small or, as the case 
may be, of medium enterprise with such authority as 
may be specified by the State Government under 
sub-section (4) or the Central Government under 
sub-section (3):
Provided that any person who, before the 
commencement of this Act, established—
(a) a small scale industry and obtained a 
registration certificate, may, at his discretion; 
and
(b) an industry engaged in the manufacture or 
production of goods pertaining to any industry 
specified in the First Schedule to the Industries 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
635
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 
1951), having investment in plant and machinery 
of more than one crore rupees but not exceeding 
ten crore rupees and, in pursuance of the 
notification of the Government of India in the 
erstwhile Ministry of Industry (Department of 
Industrial Development) number S.0.477 (E) 
dated the 25th July, 1991 filed an Industrial 
Entrepreneurs Memorandum, shall
within one hundred and eighty days from the 
commencement of this Act, file the memorandum, in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) The form of the memorandum, the procedure of 
its filing and other matters incidental thereto shall be 
such as may be notified by the Central Government 
after obtaining the recommendations of the Advisory 
Committee in this behalf.
(3) The authority with which the memorandum shall be 
filed by a medium enterprise shall be such as may be 
specified by notification, by the Central Government.
(4) The State Government shall, by notification, 
specify the authority with which a micro or small 
enterprise may file the memorandum.
(5) The authorities specified under sub-sections (3) 
and (4) shall follow, for the purpose of this section, 
the procedure notified by the Central Government 
under sub-section (2).” 
(emphasis supplied)
Section 8(1)(a) provides that, “a micro or a small enterprise may, 
at his discretion” and even a medium enterprise engaged in 
providing or rendering services, also “may at his discretion” file 
a memorandum with the authority as may be specified by the 
Government. This important feature of the statute recognising 
and vesting of the discretion has not been noticed. There is 
also a logical follow-up to this choice or discretion vested 
in the micro or small enterprise and the medium enterprise 
engaged in rendering services for filing a memorandum in sub-
636
section (4) of Section 8 and also proviso (a) to Section 8(1). As 
the said sub-section (4) of Section 8 relates to micro or small 
enterprises, the State Government shall by notification, specify 
the authority with which such micro or small enterprise may 
file a memorandum. Considering the choice and discretion 
specifically provided to these enterprises, it becomes very clear 
that there is no mandatory prescription of filing a memorandum. 
Conversely it appears that medium enterprises engaged in 
manufacture or production of goods, “shall file a memorandum” 
with such authority as may be specified, and this is reflected 
in the proviso (b) to Section 8(1). At this stage, it is relevant to 
note that the definition of supplier under Section 2(n) is confined 
only to micro or small enterprise and does not encompass a 
medium enterprise. 
14.6	There is a reason for this. The report of the Expert Committee on 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises clarifies the position that 
filing of memorandum by these enterprises is never mandatory. 
The relevant portion is as under23: 
4.5 Formalization of MSMEs 
As per 73rd round of National Sample Survey 
(NSS), there are 63.39 million MSMEs in the 
country. However, a large number of MSEs exist in 
the informal sector and are not registered with any 
statutory authority. Reasons for lack of registration 
are many and varied. For nano/household type of 
enterprises, in their view, not obtaining registration 
is an escape from official machinery, paperwork, 
costs and rent seeking. For them, it is perhaps “the 
art of not being governed”. Registration offers them 
little by way of tangible benefits. There are other 
MSEs who, upon reaching a minimum size seek 
legitimacy and acknowledgement of their existence 
to seek benefits or credit for instance, but they too 
struggle. While Udyog Aadhaar offers a simple 
23	
Report of the Expert Committee on Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (June, 2019) <https://dcmsme.
gov.in/Report%20of%20Expert%20Committee%20on%20MSMEs%20-%20The%20U%20K%20
Sinha%20Committee%20constitutes%20by%20RBI.pdf> 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
637
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
mode of registration, it is usually not enough. Often, 
more is needed e.g., Shops and Establishments, 
PAN, GST, etc. Lack of formalization impacts the 
sector in terms of development and also impacts in 
availing credit from financial institutions like banks 
and in terms of policy making as well as development 
interventions. Registration provides information on 
nature of business, location, segmentation, etc. In 
the absence of a robust system of registration for 
capturing information on operational units, new units 
and exits, reliance has to be placed on surrogate data 
or on national census/ surveys, which are infrequent. 
The various avenues available to the MSMEs for 
formalization are discussed below: 
4.5.1 Registration of Enterprises 
i. The Committee deliberated on the lack of 
formalization of a large number of MSMEs particularly 
in the micro category. The registration requirements 
of Indian enterprises is primarily governed by the 
First Schedule to the Industrial Development and 
Regulation (IDR) Act, 1951. It is mandatory only 
for a class of Medium enterprises which are 
engaged in the manufacture of goods. The 
registration of MSEs and Medium enterprises 
engaged in services activities is discretionary. 
However, over a period of time, registration has been 
an intrinsic part of the development of MSMEs itself. 
Having a registration certificate entitles an MSME for 
numerous benefits. Particularly after the MSMED Act, 
2006, which came into effect from October 2, 2006, 
availability of registration certificate has assumed 
greater importance.
(emphasis supplied)
14.7	The above-referred extract from the Report of expert committee 
clearly indicates that MSME still exists as informal sector 
and it is also recognized that “registration offers them little 
by way of tangible benefits”. The committee also recognises 
that even though simpler modes of registration have been 
638
introduced, they are usually not enough. It further suggests 
that filing of memorandum provides information on the nature 
of business, location, and segmentation so that the regulators 
can capture “information on operational units”. Paragraph 
4.5.1 also recognises the policy of lack of formalisation and it 
is expected that over a period of time filing of memorandum 
could be an intrinsic part of development of MSME itself. The 
above referred committee report as well as other documents 
very clearly establish that at no point of time filing of registration 
of MSME was ever considered to be precondition for availing 
the dispute resolution remedy under Section 18. 
14.8	We have noted three clear features in the statutory regime. To 
start with, Section 18 does not use the expression supplier, 
instead employs the phrase, “any party to a dispute, may”. We 
have also noted that the definition of the expression ‘supplier’ is 
not confined to a micro or a small enterprise which has filed a 
memorandum under Section 8(1) but also includes companies 
or other entities engaged in selling goods or rendering services 
by an enterprise. Thirdly, Section 8 grants a discretion to a 
micro or a small enterprise in filing a memorandum with the 
authority. 
14.9	Further, it is noteworthy that a “micro” [section 2(h)], “small” 
[section 2(m)] or “medium enterprises” [section 2(g)], formation 
and existence is simply on the basis of their investment as 
provided in Section 7 relating to classification of an Enterprise. 
They subsist without any formal “recognition”, “consent” 
or “registration”. The Act uses the expression filing of a 
“memorandum”. That is all. That too, at the discretion of the 
micro and small enterprises. The cumulative account of these 
four features is compelling and leads us to the conclusion that 
an application by a micro or a small enterprise to the Facilitation 
Council under Section 18 cannot be rejected on the ground 
that the said enterprise has not registered itself in Section 8. 
15.	 Having considered the definition of the expression ‘supplier’, 
and also having considered the classification of enterprises into 
micro, small and medium with respect to each of which there is a 
separate legal regime to be suggested by the Advisory Committee 
and notified by the Central and State Governments, and in view 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
639
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
of the discretion specifically vested with the micro and small 
enterprises for filing a memorandum under Section 8 of the Act, 
the submission that the Facilitation Council cannot entertain a 
reference under Section 18 if the enterprise is not registered under 
Section 8 must be rejected. 
16.	 We will now discuss the cases relied on by the appellant.
17.	 Re: Silpi Industries v. Kerala State Road Transport Corporation: 
This is the lead judgment which has given the impression that this 
Court has laid down the law that Section 18 cannot be invoked by an 
Enterprise if it has not filed a memorandum under Section 8 of the 
Act before entering into a contract. However, the issues that arose 
for consideration in Silpi Industries are in complete contrast with the 
present case. In that case, there were two appeals, and they involved 
different facts and circumstances. The short facts in the first appeal 
was that the appellants referred the matter to the Facilitation Council 
which made an award in favour of the appellant under the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act. The award was challenged under Section 34 and 
the same was dismissed. During the pendency of the appeal under 
Section 37, the High Court decided a preliminary issue as to whether 
the Limitation Act would apply to arbitral proceedings under the 
MSME. In the other appeal, the issue that arose before the High 
Court was whether there is a right to file a counterclaim in arbitral 
proceedings under MSME. The High Court answered both issues in 
the affirmative, thus the appeal before this Court in Silpi Industries 
(supra). Before considering the appeals, the following two issues 
were framed.
(i)	
Whether the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 is applicable 
to arbitration proceedings initiated under Section 18(3) of the 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006?
(ii)	
Whether, counterclaim is maintainable in such arbitration 
proceedings?
17.1	On the first issue, this Court held that the Limitation Act applies. 
The relevant portion of the order is as under; 
“27…Thus, we are of the view that no further elaboration 
is necessary on this issue and we hold that the provisions 
of the Limitation Act, 1963 will apply to the arbitrations 
covered by Section 18(3) of the 2006 Act. We make it 
640
clear that as the judgment of the High Court is an order of 
remand, we need not enter into the controversy whether 
the claims/counterclaims are within time or not. We keep 
it open to the primary authority to go into such issues and 
record its own findings on merits.”
17.2	On the second issue also, this Court held that the counterclaim 
is maintainable. The relevant portion is as under: 
“40. For the aforesaid reasons and on a harmonious 
construction of Section 18(3) of the 2006 Act and 
Section 7(1) and Section 23(2-A) of the 1996 Act, 
we are of the view that counterclaim is maintainable 
before the statutory authorities under the MSMED 
Act.”
17.3	In view of the finding that the Limitation Act will apply to MSME 
arbitration and also that a counterclaim is maintainable in an 
MSME arbitration, the Court could have disposed of the appeal 
as nothing further remained for adjudication and determination. 
However, it appears that the respondent seems to have made 
an argument that the appellant in the second set of appeals 
is not entitled to any relief whatsoever. This argument led to 
the court making the following observation in paragraph 41 of 
the judgment.
“41…Though, we are of the view that counterclaim 
and set-off is maintainable before the statutory 
authorities under the MSMED Act, the appellant in 
this set of appeals is not entitled for the relief, for 
the reason that on the date of supply of goods and 
services the appellant did not have the registration 
by submitting the memorandum as per Section 8 of 
the Act….”
17.4	This fact led to the Court rejecting the claim of the appellant 
therein that there were no supplies after the registration under 
Section 8 of the Act. The relevant portion of the order of the 
judgment is as under; 
“42. Though the appellant claims the benefit of provisions 
under the MSMED Act, on the ground that the appellant 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
641
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
was also supplying as on the date of making the claim, 
as provided under Section 8 of the MSMED Act, but same 
is not based on any acceptable material. The appellant, 
in support of its case placed reliance on a judgment of 
the Delhi High Court in GE T&D India Ltd.,24 but the said 
case is clearly distinguishable on facts as much as in the 
said case, the supplies continued even after registration 
of entity under Section 8 of the Act. In the present case, 
undisputed position is that the supplies were concluded 
prior to registration of supplier. The said judgment of the 
Delhi High Court relied on by the appellant also would 
not render any assistance in support of the case of the 
appellant. In our view, to seek the benefit of provisions 
under the MSMED Act, the seller should have registered 
under the provisions of the Act, as on the date of entering 
into the contract. In any event, for the supplies pursuant to 
the contract made before the registration of the unit under 
provisions of the MSMED Act, no benefit can be sought 
by such entity, as contemplated under the MSMED Act.
43. While interpreting the provisions of Interest on 
Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial 
Undertakings Act, 1993, this Court, in the judgment in 
Shanti Conductors25 has held that date of supply of goods/
services can be taken as the relevant date, as opposed 
to date on which contract for supply was entered, for 
applicability of the aforesaid Act. Even applying the said 
ratio also, the appellant is not entitled to seek the benefit 
of the Act. There is no acceptable material to show that, 
supply of goods has taken place or any services were 
rendered, subsequent to registration of the appellant as 
the unit under the MSMED Act, 2006. By taking recourse 
to filing memorandum under sub-section (1) of Section 8 
of the Act, subsequent to entering into contract and supply 
of goods and services, one cannot assume the legal 
status of being classified under the MSMED Act, 2006, 
24	
GE T&D India Ltd. v. Reliable Engg. Projects & Mktg., 2017 SCC OnLine Del 6978.
25	
Shanti Conductors (supra). 
642
as an enterprise, to claim the benefit retrospectively from 
the date on which the appellant entered into contract with 
the respondent.
44. The appellant cannot become micro or small enterprise 
or supplier, to claim the benefits within the meaning of the 
MSMED Act, 2006, by submitting a memorandum to obtain 
registration subsequent to entering into the contract and 
supply of goods and services. If any registration is obtained, 
same will be prospective and applies for supply of goods 
and services subsequent to registration but cannot operate 
retrospectively. Any other interpretation of the provision 
would lead to absurdity and confer unwarranted benefit 
in favour of a party not intended by legislation.”
18.	 In the first place, whether an Enterprise is disabled from seeking a 
reference before filing a memorandum under Section 8 for registration 
never arose for consideration in Silpi (supra). More importantly, the 
Court did not examine any provisions of the Act and their implication 
on the right to seek a reference under Section 18 of the Act. This 
was natural because the Court did not frame an issue of registration. 
On the facts, the Court also held that there was no proof whatsoever 
that the appellant had made any supplies as contemplated in the 
Shanti Conductors (supra) case. Though we are concerned about 
the interpretation of the Act, we may mention at this very stage that 
it is an admitted fact that the respondent has, in fact, raised 41 out 
of 53 bills after its registration on 19.01.2016.26 Be that as it may, in 
view of the above referred analysis, we are of the opinion that Silpi 
Industries (supra) is not an authority on the issue that a reference 
under Section 18 cannot be made by a micro or small enterprise if 
supplies were made or contracts were executed before filing of the 
memorandum under Section 8 of the Act.
19.	 Re: Gujarat State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd. v. Mahakali 
Foods Pvt. Ltd.27 This case considered a batch of appeals which 
gave rise to the following questions of law, which were formulated 
as under: 
26	
The complete details regarding bills raised after registration are indicated in paragraph no. 25, page 13 
of the counter affidavit filed by the enterprise.
27	
[2022] 19 SCR 1094 : (2023) 6 SCC 401
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
643
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
“(i) Whether the provisions of Chapter V of the MSMED 
Act, 2006 would have an effect overriding the provisions 
of the Arbitration Act, 1996? 
(ii) Whether any party to a dispute with regard to any 
amount due under Section 17 of the MSMED Act, 2006 
would be precluded from making a reference to the 
Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council under  
sub-section (1) of Section 18 of the said Act, if an 
independent arbitration agreement existed between the 
parties as contemplated in Section 7 of the Arbitration 
Act, 1996?
(iii) Whether the Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation 
Council, itself could take up the dispute for arbitration 
and act as an arbitrator, when the Council itself had 
conducted the conciliation proceedings under sub-section 
(2) of Section 18 of the MSMED Act, 2006 in view of the 
bar contained in Section 80 of the Arbitration Act, 1996?”
20.	 It is evident from the above that the substantial question for 
consideration that arose for consideration in Mahakali Foods (supra) 
was whether the MSME Act overrides the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996, and such other incidental questions. There was no issue 
whatsoever, as has arisen in our case, that is, about the right or rather 
a disability to seek a reference under Section 18, if the enterprise 
has not filed a memorandum. Answering the issues that have arisen 
for consideration, the Court returned the findings in paragraph 52.1 
to 52.5 which are as follows:
“52. The upshot of the above is that:
52.1. Chapter V of the MSMED Act, 2006 would override 
the provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1996.
52.2 No party to a dispute with regard to any amount 
due under Section 17 of the MSMED Act, 2006 would be 
precluded from making a reference to the Micro and Small 
Enterprises Facilitation Council, though an independent 
arbitration agreement exists between the parties.
52.3. The Facilitation Council, which had initiated the 
conciliation proceedings under Section 18(2) of the MSMED 
644
Act, 2006 would be entitled to act as an arbitrator despite 
the bar contained in Section 80 of the Arbitration Act.
52.4. The proceedings before the Facilitation Council/
institute/centre acting as an arbitrator/Arbitral Tribunal 
under Section 18(3) of the MSMED Act, 2006 would be 
governed by the Arbitration Act, 1996.
52.5. The Facilitation Council/institute/centre acting as an 
Arbitral Tribunal by virtue of Section 18(3) of the MSMED 
Act, 2006 would be competent to rule on its own jurisdiction 
as also the other issues in view of Section 16 of the 
Arbitration Act, 1996.
21.	 The Court also reached another conclusion in paragraph 52.6, which 
is as follows:	
52.6. A party who was not the “supplier” as per the definition 
contained in Section 2(n) of the MSMED Act, 2006 on the 
date of entering into contract cannot seek any benefit as the 
“supplier” under the MSMED Act, 2006. If any registration 
is obtained subsequently the same would have an effect 
prospectively and would apply to the supply of goods and 
rendering services subsequent to the registration.”
22.	 Something similar to the decision in Silpi Industries (supra) transpired 
in Mahakali Foods (supra) as well. Even though the issue of 
registration did not arise, a submission was made to the following 
effect.
 “49. One of the submissions made by the learned counsel 
for the buyers was that if the party supplier was not the 
“supplier” within the meaning of Section 2(n) of the MSMED 
Act, 2006 on the date of the contract entered into between 
the parties, it could not have made reference of dispute 
to Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council under 
Section 18(1) of the MSMED Act, 2006 and in such cases, 
the Council would not have the jurisdiction to decide the 
disputes as an arbitrator.”
23.	 In view of the above submission, the Court proceeded to rely on 
Silpi Industries (supra), and allowed the prayer. The relevant portion 
is as under: -
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
645
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
“50. At this juncture, very pertinent observations made 
by this Court in Silpi Industries case28 on this issue are 
required to be reproduced ….
51. Following the abovestated ratio, it is held that a 
party who was not the “supplier” as per Section 2(n) of 
the MSMED Act, 2006 on the date of entering into the 
contract, could not seek any benefit as a supplier under 
the MSMED Act, 2006. A party cannot become a micro or 
small enterprise or a supplier to claim the benefit under the 
MSMED Act, 2006 by submitting a memorandum to obtain 
registration subsequent to entering into the contract and 
supply of goods or rendering services. If any registration 
is obtained subsequently, the same would have the effect 
prospectively and would apply for the supply of goods and 
rendering services subsequent to the registration. The 
same cannot operate retrospectively. However, such issue 
being jurisdictional issue, if raised could also be decided 
by the Facilitation Council/Institute/Centre acting as an 
Arbitral Tribunal under the MSMED Act, 2006.”
24.	 It is evident from the above that even in Mahakali Foods (supra), 
the issue which has arisen for our consideration never arose. There 
was neither an issue, discussion, nor analysis on the applicability 
of Section 18 for enterprises that have not filed a memorandum. 
The decision in Mahakali Foods (supra) is certainly an authority 
on the issues that were formulated in paragraph 11 of the said 
28	
“42. … In our view, to seek the benefit of provisions under the MSMED Act, the seller should have 
registered under the provisions of the Act, as on the date of entering into the contract. In any event, for 
the supplies pursuant to the contract made before the registration of the unit under provisions of the 
MSMED Act, no benefit can be sought by such entity, as contemplated under MSMED Act.
43. While interpreting the provisions of Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary 
Industrial Undertakings Act, 1993, this Court, in the judgment in Shanti Conductors (P) Ltd. v. Assam SEB 
[Shanti Conductors (P) Ltd. v. Assam SEB, (2019) 19 SCC 529 : (2020) 4 SCC (Civ) 409] has held that date 
of supply of goods/services can be taken as the relevant date, as opposed to date on which contract for 
supply was entered, for applicability of the aforesaid Act. Even applying the said ratio also, the appellant is 
not entitled to seek the benefit of the Act. … By taking recourse to filing memorandum under sub-section (1) 
of Section 8 of the Act, subsequent to entering into contract and supply of goods and services, one cannot 
assume the legal status of being classified under the MSMED Act, 2006, as an enterprise, to claim the 
benefit retrospectively from the date on which appellant entered into contract with the respondent.
44. The appellant cannot become micro or small enterprise or supplier, to claim the benefits within the 
meaning of the MSMED Act 2006, by submitting a memorandum to obtain registration subsequent to 
entering into the contract and supply of goods and services. If any registration is obtained, same will be 
prospective and applies for supply of goods and services subsequent to registration but cannot operate 
retrospectively. Any other interpretation of the provision would lead to absurdity and confer unwarranted 
benefit in favour of a party not intended by legislation.”
646
judgment, which have already been extracted hereinabove. Even the 
concluding paragraph in Mahakali Foods (supra) clearly establishes 
the fact that the Court was only considering the issue of whether 
the MSMED Act, being a special legislation, overrides the Arbitration 
Act or not. The relevant portion of the judgement is as under: -
“77. The issues raised and the submissions made by the 
learned counsel appearing for the appellant with regard 
to the overriding effect of the MSMED Act, 2006 over the 
Arbitration Act, 1996, jurisdiction of Facilitation Council, 
the parties autonomy to enter into an agreement qua 
the statutory provisions, the issue of casus omissus, etc. 
have been discussed and decided hereinabove which 
need not be reiterated or repeated. Accordingly, it is held 
that the reference made to the Facilitation Council would 
be maintainable in spite of an independent arbitration 
agreement existing between the parties to whom the 
MSMED Act, 2006 is applicable, and such Council would be 
entitled to proceed under sub-section (2) of Section 18 of 
the MSMED Act, 2006 as also to act as an arbitrator or to 
refer the disputes to the institution or centre as contemplated 
under Section 18(3) of the MSMED Act, 2006. As held 
earlier, such Facilitation Council/Institute/Centre acting as 
an Arbitral Tribunal would have the jurisdiction to rule over 
on its own jurisdiction as per Section 16 of the Arbitration 
Act, 1996. In that view of the matter, the present appeal also 
deserves to be dismissed and is, accordingly, dismissed.”
25.	 Apart from Silpi Industries (supra), Mahakali Foods (supra), 
Mr. Sankaranarayanan also relied on two orders of this Court in 
Vaishno Enterprises v. Hamilton Medical AG and Anr.29 and M/s Nitesh 
Estates Ltd. v. Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council of 
Haryana & Ors.30. These short orders do not lay down the law but 
follow the decision of this Court in Silpi Industries (supra). 
26.	 In Vaishno (supra), the contract was entered into on 24.08.2020, but 
as the registration was made on 28.08.2020, the Court held that the 
appellant was not an MSME and, therefore, the Act will not apply. The 
order seems to have been made in the facts and circumstances of 
29	
[2022] 1 SCR 771 : 2022 SCC OnLine SC 355
30	
C.A. No. 5276/2022@ SLP (C) No. 26682/2018
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
647
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
the case. There was neither an issue about the supply of goods nor a 
formulation of the question as to whether the filing of a memorandum 
is mandatory for invocation of reference under Section 18.
26.1	The order in Nitesh Estates (supra), also relied on, observed that 
the issue involved is squarely covered against the respondents in 
view of the decision in Silpi Industries (supra) holding that filing of 
a memorandum is mandatory for initiation of proceedings under 
Section 18.
27.	 A decision where the issue was neither raised nor preceded by any 
consideration, in State of U.P. v. Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd.31 this 
Court held, “the Court did not feel bound by earlier decision as it was 
rendered without any argument, without reference to the crucial words 
of the rule and without any citation of the authority”. Further, approving 
the decision of this Court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gurnam 
Kaur32 which held that “precedents sub-silentio and without argument 
are of no moment” this Court held that, “a decision which is not express 
and is not founded on reasons nor it proceeds on consideration of 
issue cannot be deemed to be a law declared to have a binding effect 
as is contemplated by Article 141”. The same approach was adopted 
in Arnit Das v. State of Bihar33 where it was held that “a decision not 
expressed, not accompanied by reasons and not proceeding on a 
conscious consideration of an issue cannot be deemed to be a law 
declared to have a binding effect as is contemplated by Article 141. 
That which has escaped in the judgment is not the ratio decidendi. 
This is the rule of sub-silentio, in the technical sense when a particular 
point of law was not consciously determined”.
28.	 In this context, it is also important to note that, as an institution, our 
Supreme Court performs the twin functions of decision-making and 
precedent-making. A substantial portion of our jurisdiction under 
Article 136 is reflective of regular appellate disposition of decision 
making. Every judgment or order made by this Court in disposing 
of these appeals is not intended to be a binding precedent under 
Article 141. Though the arrival of a dispute for this Court’s 
consideration, either for decision-making or precedent-making is at 
the same tarmac, every judgment or order which departs from this 
31	
[1991] 3 SCR 64 : (1991) 4 SCC 139
32	
[1988] Supp. 2 SCR 929 : (1989) 1 SCC 101
33	
[2000] Supp. 1 SCR 69 : (2000) 5 SCC 488
648
Court lands at the doorstep of the High Courts and the subordinate 
courts as a binding precedent. We are aware of the difficulties that 
High Courts and the subordinate courts face in determining whether 
the judgment is in the process of decision-making or precedent-
making, particularly when we have also declared that even an obiter 
of this Court must be treated as a binding precedent for the High 
Courts and the courts below. In the process of decision making, this 
Court takes care to indicate the instances where the decision of the 
Supreme Court is not to be treated as precedent.34 It is therefore 
necessary to be cautious in our dispensation and state whether a 
particular decision is to resolve the dispute between the parties and 
provide finality or whether the judgment is intended to and in fact 
declares the law under Article 141.
29.	 Conclusion and reference to larger Bench: On the interpretation 
of the provisions of the Act we have arrived at a clear opinion and 
have expressed the same. Though it is possible for us to follow the 
precedents referred to in para 27 to arrive at the conclusion that the 
judgments in the case of Silpi Industries (supra) and Mahakali Foods 
(supra) coupled with the subsequent orders in Vaishno Enterprises 
(supra) and M/s Nitesh Estates (supra) cannot be considered to be 
binding precedents on the issue that has arisen for our consideration, 
taking into account the compelling need to ensure clarity and certainty 
about the applicable precedents on the subject, we deem it appropriate 
to refer this appeal to a three Judge Bench. 
30.	 The Registry is directed to place the appeal paperbooks along with 
our detailed judgment before the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India for 
constitution of an appropriate Bench.
Result of the case: Referred to three Judges Bench.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
34	
Union of India v. All Gujarat Federation of Tax Consultants (2006) 13 SCC 473; Francis Stanly v. 
Intelligence Officer, Narcotic Control Bureau, Thiruvananthapuram (2006) 13 SCC 210; Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Ltd. v. P. Kesavan (2004) 9 SCC 772; Vishnu Dutt Sharma v. Manju Sharma (2009) 6 SCC 
379; Chandigarh Housing Board v. Narinder Kaur Makol (2000) 6 SCC 415; Also refer to the commentary 
citing catena of judgements where this Court has enumerated the ‘events when decision-making is not 
to be treated as a precedent’ in Durga Das Basu, ‘Commentary on Constitution of India’ (9th Edition, 
Vol. IX), page 9858; See also, Allen v. Flood, (1893) AC 1 “a case is only an authority for what it actually 
decides”. 