[2025] 7 S.C.R. 394 : 2025 INSC 810
Amlesh Kumar 
v. 
The State of Bihar
(Criminal Appeal No. 2901 of 2025)
09 June 2025
[Sanjay Karol* and Prasanna B. Varale, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether in the attending facts and circumstances, the High 
Court could have accepted a submission of the Sub-Divisional 
Police Officer, to conduct narco-analysis test of all the accused 
persons (including the appellant) and other witnesses, during 
the investigation; whether a report of a voluntary narco-analysis 
test can form the sole basis of conviction in the absence of other 
evidence on record; whether an accused can voluntarily seek a 
narco-analysis test, as a matter of an indefeasible right.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Art.20(3) and Art.21 – Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 – s.439 – The High Court accepted the 
submission of the Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Mahua, that 
she would conduct narco-analysis test of all the accused 
persons (including the appellant herein) and other witnesses, 
during the investigation – Correctness:
Held: There was no reason for the High Court to accept a 
submission by the Investigating Officer, stating that they will 
conduct a narco-analysis test of all the accused persons – Such 
a submission and its acceptance, is in direct contravention to the 
judgment of this Court in Selvi, being hit by the protections u/
Arts.20(3) and 21 of the Constitution – Moreover, it is settled law 
that while entertaining an application for grant of bail, the Court 
has to take into consideration the allegations against the accused; 
period of custody undergone; nature of evidence and the crime 
in question; likelihood of influencing witnesses and other such 
relevant grounds – It does not involve entering into a roving enquiry 
or accepting the use of involuntary investigative techniques  – 
Therefore, the High Court has erred in accepting a submission 
to carry out a narco-analysis test of all accused persons by the 
Investigating Officer. [Paras 10, 11, 13]
* Author
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
395
Amlesh Kumar v. The State of Bihar
Evidence, 1872 – s.27 – Whether a report of a voluntary 
narco-analysis test can form the sole basis of conviction in 
the absence of other evidence on record:
Held: This Court in Selvi had considered voluntary narco-analysis 
tests and opined that the reports thereof cannot be admitted directly 
into evidence – Information that is discovered, as a consequence 
thereof, can be admitted with the aid of s.27 of the Evidence Act, 
1872 – It is settled that in the absence of supporting evidence, a 
conviction cannot be based solely on such information – Therefore, 
a report of a voluntary narco analysis test with adequate safeguards 
as well in place, or information found as a result thereof, cannot form 
the sole basis of conviction of an accused person. [Paras 14, 15, 16]
Evidence – Voluntary narco-analysis test – Whether an accused 
can voluntarily seek a narco analysis test, as a matter of an 
indefeasible right:
Held: The accused has a right to voluntarily undergo a narco-
analysis test at an appropriate stage – The appropriate stage for 
such a test to be conducted is when the accused is exercising his 
right to lead evidence in a trial – However, there is no indefeasible 
right with the accused to undergo a narco-analysis test, for upon 
receipt of such an application the concerned Court, must consider 
the totality of circumstances surrounding the matter, such as free 
consent, appropriate safeguards etc., authorizing a person to 
undergo a voluntary narco-analysis test. [Para 21]
Case Law Cited
Selvi and Ors. v. State of Karnataka [2010] 5 SCR 381 : (2010) 
7 SCC 263; Sangitaben Shaileshbhai Datana v. State of Gujarat 
(2019) 14 SCC 522; Vinobhai v. State of Kerela, 2025 SCC Online 
SC 178; Manoj Kumar Soni v. State of M.P., 2023 SCC OnLine 
SC 984 – relied on.
Rajesh Talwar v. CBI, 2013 SCC Online All 5533; Dominic Luis v. 
State, 2014 SCC Online Bom 452; Mohd. Samir v. State, 2017 
SCC Online Bom 19; Ashwini Kumar Upadhyay v. Union of India, 
2023 SCC Online Del 3816; Louis v. State of Kerala, 2021 SCC 
Online Ker 4519; State of Gujarat v. Sanjay Kumar Kanchanlal 
Desai, 2014 SCC Online Guj 6150; Navjeet Kaur v. State of 
Punjab, 2015 SCC Online P&H 15351 – referred to.
396
Supreme Court Reports
Books and Periodicals Cited
B R Sharma, Forensic Science in Criminal Investigation & Trials, 
Sixth Edition, 2020 – Paragraph 32.1.1
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Evidence, 
1872.
List of Keywords
Narco-analysis test; Forced or involuntary narco-analysis test; 
Regular bail; Right against self-incrimination; Right to privacy; 
Indefeasible right; Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
2901 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 09.11.2023 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Patna in CRLM No. 71293 of 2023
Appearances for Parties
Gaurav Agrawal, Sr. Adv./Amicus Curiae, Manan Garg.
Advs. for the Appellant:
Mithilesh Kumar Singh, Ashutosh Kumar Singh, Mrs. Manju Singh, 
Aditya Durgvanshi, Saumitra Singh, Apurva Pandey.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Anshul Narayan, Prem Prakash.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol, J.
Leave Granted.
2.	
The present Appeal arises from the impugned Order dated 9th 
November 2023 passed in Criminal Miscellaneous No.71293 of 
2023 by the High Court of Judicature at Patna, whereby the Court 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
397
Amlesh Kumar v. The State of Bihar
accepted the submission of the Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Mahua, 
that she would conduct narco-analysis test of all the accused persons 
(including the Appellant herein) and other witnesses, during the 
investigation. 
3.	
Aggrieved thereof, the Appellant is before us. The significant ground 
of challenge taken is that the acceptance of such a submission by 
the High Court is in direct contravention of the exposition of law 
laid down by this Court in Selvi and Ors. v. State of Karnataka1, 
wherein it was observed that forceful subjection of an individual to 
techniques, such as the narco-analysis test, violates personal liberty 
enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
4.	
The brief facts giving rise to the Appeal at hand are as follows:
4.1.	 On 24th August 2022, FIR No.545 of 2022 was registered at 
P.S. Mahua under Sections 341, 342, 323, 363, 364, 498(A), 
504, 506 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 18602, against 
the Appellant (husband) and his family. It was stated by the 
complainant therein that her sister got married to the Appellant 
on 11th December 2020, and thereafter, the accused persons 
had been making repeated demands for dowry and beating her. 
On 22nd August 2022, she received a call from the Appellant, 
informing that her sister had run away from the matrimonial 
home. Despite searching, she is unable to locate her sister 
and suspects foul play by the accused persons (including the 
Appellant).
4.2.	 The case of the Appellant is that on 21st August 2022, while en 
route to Ayodhya, his wife got off the bus at Baabali Chawk for 
nature’s call but never returned. He filed a complaint before P.S. 
Jahangir Ganj, recorded as GD No. 038, on 28th August 2022. 
4.3.	 The admitted position is that the missing person (wife) has 
not been found to date. The mother, father and brothers of 
the Appellant have been granted bail by the High Court of 
Judicature at Patna. 
4.4.	 The Appellant’s prayer for regular bail came to be rejected vide 
Order dated 1st August 2023 passed by the Sessions Judge, 
1	
(2010) 7 SCC 263.
2	
Hereinafter ‘IPC’.
398
Supreme Court Reports
Vaishali at Hajipur in B.P.No.1141 of 2023. The Court was not 
inclined to grant bail on the basis of the allegations made in the 
FIR, as well as the confessional statements of the co-accused, 
who stated that they had thrown the missing person in the river 
Saryu on the intervening night of the 21st and 22nd August 2022.
4.5.	 Dissatisfied with the Order of the Sessions Judge, the Appellant 
approached the High Court of Judicature at Patna for grant of a 
regular bail vide Crl. Misc. No.71293 of 2023. Vide the impugned 
interim Order, the High Court accepted the submission of the 
Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Mahua, that she will conduct a 
narco-analysis test of all the accused persons and posted the 
case for hearing on 12th July 2024. The relevant portion thereof 
is extracted below, for ready reference :
“2. Pursuant to the order dated 07.11.2023, the 
SubDivisional Police Officer, Mahua and the S.H.O. 
Mahua are present in the court. 
3. The S.D.P.O. Mahua, assures this court that she 
will take further steps in the investigation to find out 
details about the missing woman and for that she has 
further submitted that she will get narco test of all the 
accused persons and other witnesses, if required in 
the investigation. 
4. List this case on 12.07.2024. 
5. On the next date of hearing, the investigation report 
shall be produced by the learned APP.”
(Emphasis supplied)
4.6.	 Aggrieved thereof, the Appellant has preferred the present 
Appeal before this Court. 
5.	
We have heard the learned counsel for the Appellant and the learned 
Addl. Standing Counsel on behalf of the Respondent State. After 
hearing the parties in part, vide Order dated 22nd April 2025, this 
Court appointed Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, Senior Advocate, as an Amicus 
Curiae to assist the Court, given the issues involved. We have heard 
the learned Amicus Curiae and the learned counsel for the parties 
as also perused the written submissions filed.
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
399
Amlesh Kumar v. The State of Bihar
6.	
Consequently, the issues which arise for consideration of this Court 
are :
i.	
Firstly, whether in the attending facts and circumstances, the 
High Court could have accepted such a submission.
ii.	
Secondly, whether a report of a voluntary narco-analysis test 
can form the sole basis of conviction in the absence of other 
evidence on record.
iii.	
Lastly, whether an accused can voluntarily seek a narco-analysis 
test, as a matter of an indefeasible right.
7.	
For the purposes of clarity, a narco-analysis test is an interrogation 
method whereby a suspect of a crime is injected with a psychoactive 
drug under controlled conditions to suppress their reasoning power 
or the ability to determine what is good/bad for themselves.3 As 
submitted by the learned Amicus Curiae, the drug used for this test is 
sodium pentothal, which is also used in higher dosages for inducing 
general anesthesia in surgeries.
8.	
However, conducting such tests on persons accused of committing a 
crime raises serious questions, vis-à-vis, the constitutional protection 
granted from compulsion to become a witness against oneself under 
Article 20(3). The constitutional validity of this test, along with similar 
tests like the polygraph test, came to be challenged before this Court 
in Selvi (supra). After an elaborate discussion, this Court (three-
Judge Bench) held involuntary administration of this test to be hit 
by Articles 20(3) and 21 of the Constitution. The following principles 
came to be expounded:
8.1.	 Articles 20 and 21 of the Constitution are non-derogable 
and sacrosanct rights to which the judiciary cannot carve out 
exceptions; 
8.2.	 Involuntary administration of narco-analysis and similar tests is 
in contravention of the protection given by Article 20(3) of the 
Constitution, i.e. the right against self-incrimination;
8.3.	 The results of such involuntary tests cannot be considered as 
‘material evidence’ in the eyes of the law;
3	
B R Sharma, Forensic Science in Criminal Investigation & Trials, Sixth Edition, 2020 – Paragraph 32.1.1. 
400
Supreme Court Reports
8.4.	 Conducting such tests in the absence of consent violates 
‘substantive due process’ – which is an essential element 
required for restraining one’s personal liberty. Permitting such 
tests may lead to a disproportionate exercise of police powers; 
8.5.	 The boundaries of privacy of a person are also breached when 
these tests are conducted without consent; and
8.6.	 For voluntary tests, it must be ensured that appropriate 
safeguards are in place. Moreover, the results of the same 
cannot be admitted directly as evidence. Pertinently, any fact 
or information that is discovered subsequent thereto, with the 
help of the information supplied in the result, can be admitted 
into evidence with the aid of Section 27 of the Indian Evidence 
Act 1872. 
9.	
From the above exposition of law, it is clear that under no 
circumstances, is an involuntary or forced narco-analysis test 
permissible under law. Consequently, a report of such involuntary 
test or information that is discovered subsequently is also not per 
se admissible as evidence in criminal or other proceedings.
10.	 Adverting to the facts at hand, we cannot find a reason in the High 
Court accepting a submission by the Investigating Officer, stating that 
they will conduct a narco-analysis test of all the accused persons. 
Such a submission and its acceptance, is in direct contravention to 
the judgment of this Court in Selvi (supra), being hit by the protections 
under Articles 20(3) and 21 of the Constitution.
11.	 Moreover, we fail to understand how such an endeavour was accepted 
by the High Court when adjudicating an application for regular bail 
under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. It is 
settled law that while entertaining an application for grant of bail, 
the Court has to take into consideration the allegations against the 
accused; period of custody undergone; nature of evidence and the 
crime in question; likelihood of influencing witnesses and other such 
relevant grounds. It does not involve entering into a roving enquiry or 
accepting the use of involuntary investigative techniques. In similar 
circumstances, where the High Court had ordered lie detector, 
brain mapping and narco-analysis tests, this Court in Sangitaben 
Shaileshbhai Datana v. State of Gujarat4, observed :
4	
(2019) 14 SCC 522.
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
401
Amlesh Kumar v. The State of Bihar
“6. Having heard the counsel for the parties, it is 
surprising to note the present approach adopted by the 
High Court while considering the bail application. The 
High Court ordering the abovementioned tests is not 
only in contravention to the first principles of criminal law 
jurisprudence but also violates statutory requirements. 
While adjudicating a bail application, Section 439 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is the guiding principle 
wherein the court takes into consideration, inter alia, the 
gravity of the crime, the character of the evidence, position 
and status of the accused with reference to the victim and 
witnesses, the likelihood of the accused fleeing from justice 
and repeating the offence, the possibility of his tampering 
with the witnesses and obstructing the course of justice 
and such other grounds. Each criminal case presents its 
own peculiar factual matrix, and therefore, certain grounds 
peculiar to a particular case may have to be taken into 
account by the court. However, the court has to only 
opine as to whether there is a prima facie case against 
the accused. The court must not undertake meticulous 
examination of the evidence collected by the police, or 
rather order specific tests as done in the present case.
7. In the instant case, by ordering the abovementioned tests 
and venturing into the reports of the same with meticulous 
details, the High Court has converted the adjudication of a 
bail matter to that of a mini trial indeed. This assumption of 
function of a trial court by the High Court is deprecated.”
(Emphasis supplied)
12.	 We are not inclined to accept the submission of the Respondent- 
State that since modern investigative techniques are the need of 
the hour, the High Court was correct in accepting the submission 
that narco-analysis test of all accused persons will be conducted. 
While the need for modern investigative techniques may be true, 
such investigative techniques cannot be conducted at the cost of 
constitutional guarantees under Articles 20(3) and 21. 
13.	 Therefore, the first question framed is answered in the negative. 
The High Court has erred in accepting a submission to carry out a 
narco-analysis test of all accused persons by the Investigating Officer. 
402
Supreme Court Reports
14.	 In the course of proceedings, the issue of undergoing a narco-analysis 
test voluntarily came to be raised, which brings us to the second 
question framed. As discussed above, this Court in Selvi (supra) 
had considered voluntary narco-analysis tests and opined that the 
reports thereof cannot be admitted directly into evidence. Information 
that is discovered, as a consequence thereof, can be admitted with 
the aid of Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
15.	 The evidentiary value of information received through the aid of 
Section 27 is no longer res integra. This Court in Vinobhai v. State 
of Kerela5, while placing reliance on Manoj Kumar Soni v. State of 
M.P.6 held that in the absence of supporting evidence, a conviction 
cannot be based solely on such information. It was observed:
“8. ….. The law relating to the evidentiary value of recovery 
made under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
is settled by this Court in the case of Manoj Kumar Soni v. 
State of M.P.. Paragraph 22 of the said decision reads 
thus:—
“22. A doubt looms : can disclosure statements per 
se, unaccompanied by any supporting evidence, 
be deemed adequate to secure a conviction? 
We find it implausible. Although disclosure 
statements hold significance as a contributing 
factor in unriddling a case, in our opinion, 
they are not so strong a piece of evidence 
sufficient on its own and without anything 
more to bring home the charges beyond 
reasonable doubt.”
Therefore, in our view, the appellant’s guilt was not proved 
beyond a reasonable doubt.”
16.	 Consequently, in our view, a report of a voluntary narco-analysis test 
with adequate safeguards as well in place, or information found as a 
result thereof, cannot form the sole basis of conviction of an accused 
person. The second question is, therefore, answered in the negative. 
5	
2025 SCC Online SC 178.
6	
2023 SCC OnLine SC 984.
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
403
Amlesh Kumar v. The State of Bihar
17.	 Adverting to the last question framed, the learned Amicus Curiae 
has pointed out that there has been a divergence of views taken by 
High Courts on the issue as to whether a narco-analysis test can 
be claimed by an accused as a matter of right. Given the suspect 
nature of a report of narco-analysis, the Amicus Curiae submitted 
that this position must be clarified. 
18.	 On the one hand, there is High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in 
Rajesh Talwar v. CBI 7; High Court of Bombay in Dominic Luis v. 
State8 and Mohd. Samir v. State9; High Court of Delhi in Ashwini 
Kumar Upadhyay v. Union of India10; High Court of Kerala in Louis 
v. State of Kerala11; High Court of Gujarat in State of Gujarat v. 
Sanjay Kumar Kanchanlal Desai12 and High Court of Punjab & 
Haryana in Navjeet Kaur v. State of Punjab13, have held that an 
involuntary narco-analysis test cannot be relied on and have taken 
an overall view of the circumstances when an accused has sought 
a narco-analysis test himself. 
19.	 On the other hand, there is Rajasthan High Court, which in Sunil 
Bhatt v. State14, held that the accused can seek a narco-analysis 
test at a relevant stage in view of the statutory right to lead evidence 
in defence under Section 233 of the Criminal Procedure Code. 
20.	 In our view, as rightly submitted by the learned Amicus, the above 
view of the Rajasthan High Court cannot be sustained. It cannot be 
said that undergoing a narco-analysis test is part of the indefeasible 
right to lead evidence, given its suspect nature, and moreover, we 
find the same to be in the teeth of the judgment of this Court in Selvi 
(supra). It had been categorically observed:
“240. We must also contemplate situations where a threat 
given by the investigators to conduct any of the impugned 
tests could prompt a person to make incriminatory 
7	
2013 SCC Online All 5533. 
8	
2014 SCC Online Bom 452.
9	
2017 SCC Online Bom 19.
10	
2023 SCC Online Del 3816.
11	
2021 SCC Online Ker 4519.
12	
2014 SCC Online Guj 6150.
13	
2015 SCC Online P&H 15351.
14	
2022 SCC Online Raj 1443.
404
Supreme Court Reports
statements or to undergo some mental trauma. Especially 
in cases of individuals from weaker sections of society 
who are unaware of their fundamental rights and unable to 
afford legal advice, the mere apprehension of undergoing 
scientific tests that supposedly reveal the truth could push 
them to make confessional statements. Hence, the act of 
threatening to administer the impugned tests could also 
elicit testimony. It is also quite conceivable that an individual 
may give his/her consent to undergo the said tests on 
account of threats, false promises or deception by the 
investigators. For example, a person may be convinced 
to give his/her consent after being promised that this 
would lead to an early release from custody or dropping 
of charges. However, after the administration of the tests, 
the investigators may renege on such promises. In such 
a case the relevant inquiry is not confined to the apparent 
voluntariness of the act of undergoing the tests, but also 
includes an examination of the totality of circumstances.
253. We are of the view that an untrammelled right of 
resorting to the techniques in question will lead to an 
unnecessary rise in the volume of frivolous litigation before 
our courts.
264. In light of these conclusions, we hold that no individual 
should be forcibly subjected to any of the techniques 
in question, whether in the context of investigation in 
criminal cases or otherwise. Doing so would amount to an 
unwarranted intrusion into personal liberty. However, we do 
leave room for the voluntary administration of the impugned 
techniques in the context of criminal justice, provided that 
certain safeguards are in place. Even when the subject 
has given consent to undergo any of these tests, the test 
results by themselves cannot be admitted as evidence 
because the subject does not exercise conscious control 
over the responses during the administration of the test. 
However, any information or material that is subsequently 
discovered with the help of voluntary administered test 
results can be admitted in accordance with Section 27 of 
the Evidence Act, 1872.”
(Emphasis supplied)
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
405
Amlesh Kumar v. The State of Bihar
21.	 In view of the above exposition in Selvi (Supra), the third question 
is answered in the following terms :
The accused has a right to voluntarily undergo a narco-analysis test 
at an appropriate stage. We deem it appropriate to add, that the 
appropriate stage for such a test to be conducted is when the accused 
is exercising his right to lead evidence in a trial. However, there is no 
indefeasible right with the accused to undergo a narco-analysis test, 
for upon receipt of such an application the concerned Court, must 
consider the totality of circumstances surrounding the matter, such 
as free consent, appropriate safeguards etc., authorizing a person 
to undergo a voluntary narco-analysis test. We deem it appropriate 
to reproduce and reiterate the guidelines issued in Selvi (Supra) in 
this regard as follows :
“265. The National Human Rights Commission had 
published Guidelines for the Administration of Polygraph 
Test (Lie Detector Test) on an Accused in 2000. These 
Guidelines should be strictly adhered to and similar 
safeguards should be adopted for conducting the 
“narcoanalysis technique” and the “Brain Electrical 
Activation Profile” test. The text of these Guidelines has 
been reproduced below: 
(i) No lie detector tests should be administered except on 
the basis of consent of the accused. An option should be 
given to the accused whether he wishes to avail such test.
(ii) If the accused volunteers for a lie detector test, he 
should be given access to a lawyer and the physical, 
emotional and legal implication of such a test should be 
explained to him by the police and his lawyer.
(iii) The consent should be recorded before a Judicial 
Magistrate.
(iv) During the hearing before the Magistrate, the person 
alleged to have agreed should be duly represented by a 
lawyer.
(v) At the hearing, the person in question should also be 
told in clear terms that the statement that is made shall 
not be a “confessional” statement to the Magistrate but 
will have the status of a statement made to the police.
406
Supreme Court Reports
(vi) The Magistrate shall consider all factors relating to the 
detention including the length of detention and the nature 
of the interrogation.
(vii) The actual recording of the lie detector test shall be 
done by an independent agency (such as a hospital) and 
conducted in the presence of a lawyer.
(viii) A full medical and factual narration of the manner of 
the information received must be taken on record.”
22.	 Before parting with this appeal, we place on record our appreciation 
for the learned Amicus Curiae, Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, Senior Advocate, 
in extending his invaluable assistance to the Court.
23.	 Keeping in view the above discussion, we have no doubt that the 
impugned Order cannot be sustained. Consequently, the impugned 
Order dated 9th November 2023 passed in Criminal Miscellaneous 
No. 71293 of 2023 by the High Court of Judicature at Patna is 
hereby set aside. 
24.	 The bail application of the Appellant, pending if any, to be decided 
in accordance with law. 
25.	 In the attending facts and circumstances of this case, the Appeal 
is allowed. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan