[2025] 1 S.C.R. 515 : 2025 INSC 33
Geetha V.M. & Ors. 
v. 
Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 3994-3997 of 2024)
03 January 2025
[J.K. Maheshwari* and Rajesh Bindal, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the option exercised by Directorate of Health Services 
(DHS) employees to join Directorate of Medical Education (DME) 
pursuant to a policy decision of the State of Kerala ought to be 
considered as an option for absorption or a request for transfer 
under proviso to Rule 27(a) of Kerala State and Subordinate 
Service Rules, 1958 and in that situation, the inter-se seniority of 
such employees in the DME shall be reckoned from which date.
Headnotes†
Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958 – Proviso 
to r.27(a) – Kerala Service Rules, 1959 – r.36 – Transfer of 
the appellants-absorbed employees by way of absorption as 
per the policy decision of the Government of Kerala, if would 
attract the proviso to r.27(a):
Held: No – The proviso of r.27(a) is merely an exception to the 
said Rule of maintaining the seniority from the date of appointment 
in the cases of ‘on request’ and mutual transfer – The exception 
is not attracted in a case of transfer by way of absorption made 
in public interest or in administrative exigencies – Transfer of an 
employee is an incidence of service if it is in public interest – 
Government is the best judge to decide how to distribute and 
utilise the services of an employee – However, if employee 
makes a request due to some hardship and if the authority or 
the Government on being satisfied, posts such employee as per 
request, such transfer is not a transfer in public interest as it is 
on the request of the employee and not in the exigencies of the 
public administration – In the present case, the transfer was made 
by way of absorption on the basis of option and not on the basis 
of request which was in furtherance to a policy decision of the 
Govt. to abolish the dual control system enhancing the efficiency 
* Author
516
of the administration of medical colleges and attached hospitals 
thereto giving it to DME withdrawing from DHS – Therefore, the 
transfer by way of absorption on exercise of option as specified 
in Appendix I and II contained in G.O. dtd. 25.10.2008 does not 
attract the proviso to r.27(a) which only deals with the transfer on 
request or on mutual request – Thus, the action taken in public 
interest due to administrative exigency even on option is different 
than the action done on request – Appellants exercised the option 
for absorption by transfer from DHS to DME in line with the policy 
decision and thus, it cannot be considered as a case of transfer 
based on their own request, volition or voluntary choice – Proviso 
to r.27(a) is not attracted in case of a transfer by way of absorption 
done by the Department in furtherance to the policy decision of the 
Govt. – Transfer by way of absorption in public interest cannot be 
equated with the transfer on request in contingencies as specified 
in proviso to r.27(a) or applied mutually – Further, seniority of the 
absorbed employee cannot be disturbed applying the proviso 
of r.27(a) – Their seniority and inter-se seniority be maintained 
as per r.27(a) and 27(c) of Part II of 1958 Rules r/w clarificatory 
letter dated 24.04.2010 with reference to r.8 of Appendix I to G.O. 
dated 25.10.2008 – Impugned judgment set aside. [Paras 37, 39, 
47, 51-53]
Words and Phrases – ‘Transfer’; ‘option’; ‘absorb’; ‘absorption’ – 
Discussed.
Case Law Cited
K.P. Sudhakaran and Another v. State of Kerala and Others (2006) 
5 SCC 386 – held inapplicable.
Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab, 1989 SCC OnLine P&H 482 – 
approved.
Books and Periodicals Cited
P. Ramanatha Aiyar’s Advanced Law Lexicon, 7th Edition; Corpus 
Juris Secundum; Merriam-Webster Dictionary; Black’s Law 
Dictionary.
List of Acts
Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958; Kerala Service 
Rules (KSR), 1959.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
517
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
List of Keywords
Transfer; Transfer by way of absorption; Exercise of option; 
Absorbed employees; Request for transfer; Transfer on request; 
Mutual request; Seniority; Inter-se seniority; Directorate of Health 
Services (DHS); Administrative control of DHS; Directorate of 
Medical Education (DME); State of Kerala; Primary Health Centres 
(PHCs); Community Health Centres (CHCs); Taluk Hospitals; 
District Hospitals; Specialty Hospitals; Policy decision; Public 
interest; Transfer in public interest; Dual control system; Hospitals; 
Administration of medical colleges; Administrative exigency; public 
administration; Clarificatory letter; transfer applied mutually; ‘Option’; 
‘Absorb’; ‘Absorption’.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 3994-3997 
of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 13.03.2019 of the High Court of 
Kerala at Ernakulam in WA Nos. 1418, 1525, 1527 and 1652 of 2010
Appearances for Parties
V. Giri, Jayanth Muth Raj, Sr. Advs., Krishna Dev Jagarlamudi, 
Alim Anvar, Harshed Sundar, Mohammed Sadique T.A., Advs. for 
the Appellants.
Jaideep Gupta, Raghenth Basant, Sr. Advs., C. K. Sasi,  
Ms. Meena K Poulose, Riddhi Bose, Ms. Racheeta Chawla,  
Ms. Rishi Agarwal, Ms. Sampriti Bakshi, Siddharth Banerjee, 
Dileep Poolakkot, Ms. Hima Bhardwaj, K. Rajeev, Arvind Gupta,  
Advs. for the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.K. Maheshwari, J. 
1.	
The present appeals have been filed impugning the order passed 
by High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam on 13.03.2019 in W.A. 
Nos. 1418, 1525, 1527 and 1652 of 2010, reversing the judgments 
dated 29.06.2010 and 30.06.2010 passed by learned Single Judge 
518
in W.P. (C) Nos. 4599, 12381 and 14091 of 2010 and W.P. (C) No. 
20269 of 2010 respectively. 
2.	
Appellants herein are the employees who were working in the 
Directorate of Health Services (the “DHS”), later absorbed on 
furnishing option as demanded, in the Directorate of Medical 
Education (the “DME”) on account of abolition of dual control system 
of the staff in medical colleges under the policy decision of the State 
of Kerala. The rival claims of inter-se seniority between the original 
employees of DME (hereinafter referred as ‘original employees’) 
and absorbed employees from DHS in the respective categories of 
DME (hereinafter referred to as ‘absorbed employees’) made by 
both were decided by the order impugned. 
3.	
Writ Petition No. 4599/2010 was filed by the absorbed employees 
contending that they are entitled to retain their existing seniority 
even on absorption in the DME in terms of Rule 8 of Appendix I of 
the G.O. (P) No. 548/2008/H&FWD dated 25.10.2008. Since the 
inter-se seniority of the absorbed employees was yet to be finalized, 
during the pendency of the said Writ Petition, promotions made to 
the post of Junior Superintendent and Upper Division Clerks in the 
DME were cancelled. 
4.	
In the meantime, the Government of Kerala issued clarificatory letter 
No. 8195/K1/10/H&FWD dated 24.04.2010 (the “clarificatory letter”) 
indicating that seniority of the absorbed employees shall be reckoned 
from the date of order of promotion for the promotees and from 
the date of first effective advice in case of direct recruits. The said 
clarificatory letter was assailed by filing Writ Petitions Nos. 12381 and 
14091 of 2010 by the original employees. The case set out was that 
once the absorbed employees were transferred after exercising their 
‘option’, in terms of G.O. (P) No. 548/2008/H&FWD dated 25.10.2008, 
to join DME, they must rank junior and be placed at the bottom of 
the seniority list and their seniority be reckoned from the date of 
joining in the DME as per Rule 27(a) and Rule 27(c) of ‘Kerala State 
and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958 (in short “KS&SS Rules”). 
5.	
Learned Single Judge decided the writ petitions of the original and 
absorbed employees by passing the common judgment and relying 
upon Rule 8 of Appendix I of G.O. dated 25.10.2008 opined that 
seniority of staff who opted to join DME will be maintained as per 
Rule 27(a) and 27(c) of Part II, KS&SS Rules and the clarificatory letter 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
519
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
dated 24.04.2010. The Writ petition filed by the absorbed employees 
was allowed and the Writ Petitions of the original employees were 
dismissed holding that absorbed employees would be entitled to 
retain their past service rendered in DHS and their seniority in DME 
shall be reckoned from the date of initial appointment in DHS.
6.	
On filing Writ Appeal by the original employees of DHS, the Division 
Bench by the order impugned set-aside the judgment of learned 
Single Judge and observed that once absorbed employees had joined 
DME on their own request opting for inter-departmental transfer, 
proviso to Rule 27(a) of Part II of KS&SS Rules, would attract and 
the seniority of the absorbed employees will be determined with 
reference to their date of joining in the DME. The said order is under 
challenge in these appeals.
Factual Background
7.	
Prior in time, DME was formed w.e.f. 10.05.1983, to manage and 
coordinate Medical Colleges and Collegiate Hospitals in the State of 
Kerala. Hospitals attached to medical colleges were under the control 
of the DME, while Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health 
Centres (CHCs), Taluk Hospitals, District Hospitals and Specialty 
Hospitals were under the control of DHS. Before formation of the 
DME, medical colleges were operated independently but under the 
administrative control of DHS and the ‘Principal’ was the head of 
the department. After formation of DME, the authority of Principal 
was transferred to DME, however, the ‘nursing, paramedical, and 
ministerial staff’ associated with hospitals and affiliated institutions 
continued to remain under the administrative control of DHS which 
also included the power of appointment. This resulted in ‘dual control’, 
where even though administrative authority of the medical colleges 
and collegiate hospitals was shifted to DME, but the staff continued 
to remain under the control of DHS, due to which significant delay 
and administrative difficulties were being faced in ensuring timely 
assignment/posting of Staff Nurses, Nursing Assistants, Technicians, 
Attendants, Cleaning Staff, and other categories of Paramedical Staff 
at Medical College Hospitals and affiliated institutions. Additionally, 
Superintendents of Medical Colleges and Heads of Clinical 
Departments were encountering tremendous hardship to maintain 
discipline amongst staff inter-se departments. Resultantly, it posed 
as an extreme impediment for the Government of Kerala to ensure 
smooth functioning of both the Departments.
520
8.	
Elaborating on further challenges, particularly regarding appointments, 
majority of the hospital staff was appointed either by the DHS or the 
District Medical Officer. Although Hospital Superintendents had the 
power to initiate disciplinary action, yet the power for appointments, 
transfers, promotions, and discipline for these employees continued 
to remain with the DHS or District Medical Officer. Identifying the 
issues, the Government of Kerala formed several committees that 
recommended elimination of dual control system in Medical Colleges 
as a corrective measure, aimed for benefiting the public at large. To 
cite few examples, as per Indian Medical Council regulations, “All the 
teaching hospitals shall be under the academic, administrative and 
disciplinary control of Dean / Principals of Medical Colleges or Medical 
Institutions”; as per State Planning Board’s Working Group report 
on Health, Nutrition and Sanitation on 10th Five Year Plan (2002 – 
2007), the Principals / Superintendent of Medical Colleges have no 
administrative or disciplinary control over the staff. Therefore, all the 
above categories of paramedical and ministerial staff in Medical College 
Hospitals and attached other hospitals have to be appointed directly 
by DME and the existing staff must be given freedom to opt for either 
DHS or DME and all new appointments must be done separately.  
9.	
Further, the ‘Estimates Committee’ (1998 – 2000) of Kerala Legislature 
in its 28th Report recommended that the employees working in the 
Medical Colleges such as Nurses, Paramedical Staff are to be 
bifurcated from DHS and are to be brought under the control of DME 
and the existing staff should be given an opportunity to exercise 
option. Subsequent thereto, ‘Estimates Committee’ (2001 – 2004) of 
the Kerala Legislature reiterated that employees working in medical 
colleges shall be brought under the control of DME and staff which at 
present is in existing control of DHS should be afforded an opportunity 
to furnish options either of DHS or DME. The State Government 
after examining the recommendations in public interest accorded 
sanction to abolish the dual control system for the Staff attached to 
the Medical Colleges and Hospitals and brought them out from the 
administrative and disciplinary control of DHS by issuing the G.O. 
(MS) No. 124/2007/H&FWD dated 01.06.2007.
10.	 While according sanction, the State decided to ask for the options 
from existing employees of the DHS to move to the posts which 
stood transferred to DME. The relevant clauses of the said G.O. for 
understanding are quoted herein below –
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
521
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
"1.	
The sanctioned posts of all categories of staff 
(except doctors in Primary Health Centres who are 
appointed by the Health Services Department) such 
as Nursing, Paramedical and Ministerial Staff in the 
hospitals under the Director of Medical Education will 
stand shifted to the service of Directorate of Medical 
Education w.e.f. 01.06.2007.
2.	
The employees of the Health Services Department 
now working against these shifted posts shall be 
treated as on deputation to the Directorate of Medical 
Education, until further orders.
3.	
The existing employees of Health Services Department 
will be given an opportunity to exercise opinion (sic) 
to move to the posts transferred to the Director of 
Medical Education. A committee will be constituted 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Health), 
with Director of health Services, as Convener for 
discussions with service organizations regarding 
rules for exercising of option, the arrangements to 
be made in the Health Service Department due to 
the transfer of these posts, promotion and other 
service matters and for submitting recommendations 
to Government.
4.	
The appointing authority of the transferred categories 
of posts (except last grade service posts) will be 
Director of Medical Education. The Principal will be 
the appointing authority of last grade service posts.
5.	
(i) The appointment to the category / post of Nursing 
Assistant now transferred to Directorate of Medical 
Education shall be made by direct recruitment and 
the special rules will be changed accordingly. The 
Director of Medical Education will submit proposals 
for qualification for direct recruitment to the post of 
Nursing Assistant. 
(ii) However, the existing vacancies of Nursing 
Assistants are to be filled up by promoting the eligible 
Hospital attendants after giving them training. Direct 
recruitment as per 5 (i) above shall be done only to 
522
the remaining vacancies, after giving promotion to 
all the eligible Hospital – Attendants. 
(iii) Considering the acute shortage of staff, the Last 
grade service special rules shall be deemed to be 
modified in the public interest in the case of Directorate 
of Medical Education only and the Principals are 
permitted to make temporary appointment through 
Employment Exchange to all the vacant posts in 
the categories of Nursing Assistant and Hospital 
Grade – I and II, except the vacancies to be kept 
apart for promotion of eligible hands in these posts. 
(iv) The Secretary (Health) is authorized to obtain 
remarks from PSC if required for the implementation 
of any of the above decisions and submit proposals.
(v) The steps to transfer of budget allotment for salary 
and other items from Director of Health Services to 
Director of Medial (sic) Education will be taken up in 
consultation with Finance Department.” 
xx   xx   xx   xx
11.	 From the aforementioned G.O., it is also evident that State actively 
intended to identify the issues and decided to address them involving 
all the stakeholders. After extensive deliberations with all, the 
Government of Kerala by G.O. (Ms.) No. 163/07/H&FWD, dated 
16.07.2007, constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of 
Additional Secretary (Health) to resolve the issues related to abolition 
of dual control system. A meeting was convened on 10.10.2007 with 
all the stakeholders inviting their views and suggestions. During 
the meeting, highlighting the recommendations of the Estimates 
Committee (1998-2000) and Estimates Committee (2001-2004), 
consensus was reached to implement the same. After extensive 
discussions, the committee framed the ‘Draft Rules’ for options, 
‘Draft Option form’, and the qualifications required and method of 
appointment for the categories other than the common categories 
in DHS and DME, which were required to be absorbed. 
12.	 The Government of Kerala vide G.O. (Rt.) No. 1273/08/H&FWD, dated 
07.04.2008, and G.O. (Rt.) No. 2321/08/H&FWD, dated 05.07.2008, 
also nominated Administrative Officer, Kerala Heart Foundation along 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
523
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
with Nodal Officers from DHS and DME to coordinate and oversee 
the implementation of abolition of dual control system. Based on the 
aforesaid, the Committee submitted the ‘Draft Rules’ and also the ‘Draft 
Form of option’ to the Government for consideration and approval. 
13.	 Having considered these recommendations, the State Government 
issued G.O. (P) No. 548/2008/H&FWD dated 25.10.2008, partially 
modifying the G.O. dated 01.06.2007 and directed that all the 
ministerial staff, nurses, paramedical staff, including last grade 
staff under the establishment of DHS working with the DME, shall 
be brought under the administrative control of the DME, subject to 
furnishing options as specified in the rules contained in ‘Appendix I’ 
and form contained in ‘Appendix II’. 
14.	 Appendix I of the G.O. dated 25.10.2008 is titled as ‘Rules for filing 
option by the staff, on abolition of dual control systems’. Rule 8 
therein governs the seniority of staff who have opted for the DME. 
This Rule is central to the present dispute and extracted for ready 
reference below –
“…..8. The seniority of the staff opted to Department of 
Medical Education will be maintained as per Rule 27(a) 
and Rule 27(c) of Part II, KS & SS Rules.”
15.	 Appendix II of the said G.O. was for option which is in shape of a 
form required details of the employee and declaration. The declaration 
is relevant, which is extracted hereinbelow for ready reference –
“	
	
	
	
DECLARATION
I, …. hereby opt to be absorbed / continued in the 
Department of Medical Education and if my option is 
accepted, I will not put forth any claim in future to return 
to Health Services Department under any provisions. 
Place:	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Signature:
Date:	
	
	
	
	
Name and Designation”
xx   xx   xx   xx
16.	 In furtherance of the G.O. dated 01.06.2007 and G.O. dated 
25.10.2008, an ‘Option Cell’ with officers from DHS and DME both 
was constituted to scrutinize the option forms submitted by the existing 
524
employees from DHS. After scrutiny, 3072 options against 6022 
transferred posts were found valid, and the list of 3072 employees 
‘seniority wise’ and ‘category wise’ was forwarded by DHS for 
switching them to DME. In continuance, State Government vide 
G.O. (P) No. 56/2009/H&FWD dated 27.02.2009, directed that 6022 
posts under DHS establishment will be ‘shifted’ to DME. It was also 
made clear vide Order No. PLA1-2462/05/DHS dated 28.02.2009 
that lien of the employees whose names were forwarded shall stand 
transferred from DHS to DME.
17.	 In the meantime, since the model code of conduct for the General 
Elections of 2009 came into effect from 02.03.2009, therefore, the 
said two G.O.s mentioned above could not be implemented. After 
elections and on formation of new Government, in supersession of 
the previous G.O.s dated 27.02.2009 and 28.02.2009, the G.O. (P) 
No. 167/2009/H&FWD dated 17.06.2009 was issued directing that 
3096 posts in 57 categories will be forthwith transferred to the DME, 
and the DHS will issue orders transferring those employees category 
wise and station wise. As such, the employees of DHS included in 
the list be continued in DME, as per their options. The employees 
of DHS not included in the list of DME were allowed to continue on 
deputation as per G.O. 01.06.2007 until further orders. 
18.	 In the meantime, clarifications were sought by the DME about 
fixation of seniority of staff who opted for DME from DHS. The State 
Government vide its clarificatory letter dated 24.04.2010 clarified 
that the seniority of the staff who opted for DME, will be reckoned 
as per Rules 27(a) & 27(c) of Part II, KS&SS Rules, i.e., as per 
date of order of promotion in case of promotees and as per date 
of first effective advice in case of direct recruits (entry cadre) in the 
respective categories in the DHS.
Relevant Rules
19.	 In reference to the various G.O.s, the KS&SS Rules referred above 
are also relevant, therefore, extracted here as under – 
“27. Seniority – (a) Seniority of a person in a service, 
class, category or grade shall, unless he has been reduced 
to a lower rank as punishment, be determined by the date 
of the order of his first appointment to such service, class, 
category or grade.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
525
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
Explanation – For the purposes of this sub-rule, 
“appointment” shall not include appointment under rule 9 
or appointment by promotion under Rule 31.
This amendment shall be deemed to have come into force 
with effect on and from the 17th December, 1958, but shall 
not affect the seniority of any member of a service settled 
prior to the date of publication of this amendment in the 
Gazette:
Provided that the seniority of persons on mutual or inter-
unit or inter-departmental transfer from one Unit to another 
within the same Department or from one Department 
to another, as the case may be, on requests from such 
persons shall be determined with reference to the dates 
of their joining duty in the new Unit or Department. In the 
case of more than one person joining duty in the same 
grade in the same Unit or Department on the same date, 
seniority shall be determined, –
(a)	 if the persons who join duty belong to different unit 
or different departments, with reference to their age, 
the older being considered as senior, and
(b)	
if the persons who join duty belong to the same category 
of post in the same department, in accordance with 
their seniority in the Unit or Department from which 
they were transferred…….
(b)	 (This sub-rule is not relevant for the case)
(c)	 Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (a) 
and (b) above, the seniority of a person appointed to 
a class, category or grade in a service on the advice 
of the Commission shall, unless he has been reduced 
to a lower rank as punishment, be determined by the 
date of first effective advice made for his appointment 
to such class, category or grade and when two 
or more persons are included in the same list of 
candidates advised, their relatives seniority shall be 
fixed according to the order in which their names are 
arranged in the advice list:
526
Provided that the seniority of candidates who have been 
granted extension of time to join duty beyond three months 
from the date of the appointment order, except those who 
are undergoing courses of study or training which are 
prescribed as essential qualification for the post to which 
they are advised for appointment, shall be determined by 
the date of their joining duty:…….”
20.	 From contextual perusal of Rule 27(a), the seniority of a person will 
be determined from the date of the order of his first appointment to 
such service, class, category or grade. Proviso to it deals with the 
contingency where an employee asks for transfer mutually or inter-
unit or inter-departmental from one unit to another within the same 
Department or from one Department to another as the case may 
be. On such transfers, the seniority of the person who requested, 
shall be determined from the date of joining and as per clause (a) 
and (b) of the said proviso. 
21.	 Thus, accompanying proviso only contemplates determination 
of seniority when transfer as specified therein has been sought 
mutually and on request. It is relevant to clarify that the language 
of the proviso does not deal with the transfers of employees due 
to administrative exigencies or their transfer by way of absorption 
under the policy decision of the Government bifurcating the dual 
control system of the staff. 
22.	 So far as Rule 27(c) is concerned, it deals with the relative seniority 
of the employees, by which the inter-se seniority of the employees 
appointed to a class, category or grade shall be fixed according 
to the order in which their names are arrayed in the first advice 
list for his appointment to such class, category or grade. For clear 
understanding, we can say the order of recommendations in the 
selection list by Commission or Selection Board, at the time of their 
selection, shall be relevant for maintaining the relative seniority as 
specified in the final advice memo of the Commission or Board as 
the case may be. 
Findings recorded by learned Single Judge reversed by the 
Division Bench
23.	 The absorbed employees succeeded before learned Single Judge. 
The Court referring to Rule 8 of Appendix I of the G.O. dated 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
527
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
25.10.2008, held that seniority of the staff opted for joining DME will 
be maintained as per Rules 27(a) and 27(c) of Part II, KS&SS Rules 
and they will be entitled to get seniority including their past service 
under the DHS in terms of the aforementioned rules. The relevant 
findings are reproduced for ready reference as under –
"5.	
It was thereupon that WP(C) No. 12381/10 and 
14091/10 were filed by persons, who were employees 
of the DME. According to them, on exercising option 
and coming over to DME, the optees should rank 
junior most in seniority, and therefore, the clarification, 
as contained in Ext. P5 referred to above is illegal. 
Therefore, the only question that arises is whether 
the optees of DHS who have come over to DME are 
entitled to retain their seniority for their prior service 
in DHS.
6.	
In my view, the issue can be answered with reference 
to Clause 8 of Appendix I of Ext. P1 order dated 
25/10/2008, which provides that seniority of staff 
opted to Department of Medical Education will be 
maintained as per Rule 27(a) and Rule 27(c) of Part II 
KS&SSR. This precisely is what is reiterated in Ext. P5 
and this order does not introduce anything which is 
not provided in Ext. P1. Clause 8 of Appendix 1 of 
Ext. P1 is also not under challenge in WP (C) Nos. 
12381/10 or 14091/10. If that be so, necessarily, 
optees like the petitioners in WP(C) No.4599/10 
and the additional party respondents in WP(C) No. 
14091/2010 are entitled to seniority for their prior 
services under the DHS in terms of Rules 27(a) 
and (c) of Part II KS&SSR.
xx   xx   xx   xx
9.	
In view of the above, the challenge against Ext. P5 
order referred to above dated 24.04.2010 raised in 
WP(C) Nos. 12381/10 and 14091/2010 will stand 
repelled. The claim of the petitioners in WP(C) No. 
4599/10 for maintaining seniority for their service prior 
to exercising option, is upheld, in view of Clause 8 
of Appendix 1 of Ext. P1 Government Order dated 
528
25/10/2008 and Ext. P5 dated 24.4.2010 referred 
to above. The Directorate of Medical Education is 
directed to finalise the inter se seniority list of the 
optees and the existing employees of the Department 
in accordance with law and as expeditiously as 
possible. 
24.	 Being aggrieved, the original employees filed Writ Appeal, which was 
allowed and the Division Bench vide impugned judgment set aside 
the order of the Single Bench. The findings as returned by Division 
Bench are reproduced below for ready reference – 
“The dual control system of hospital staff attached to 
the Directorate of Medical Education and Directorate of 
Health Services was abolished by Government Order 
dated 25.10.2008 and clause 8 of Appendix I of thereto 
is as follows:
“8. The seniority of the staff opted to Department 
of Medical Education will be maintained as per 
Rule 27(a) and Rule 27(c) of Part II, KS&SSR”.
2. Many employees in the Department of Health Services 
opted for transfer to the Department of Medical Education 
and necessarily therefore the proviso to Rule 27(a) of Part 
II of KS&SSR extracted below applies:
“Provided that the seniority of persons of mutual 
or inter unit or inter departmental transfer from 
one unit to another within the same department 
or from one department to another, as the case 
may be, on request from such persons shall be 
determined with reference to the dates of their 
joining duty in the new unit or department”. 
(emphasis supplied)
3. The seniority of those employees who have opted from 
the Department of Health Services can only be determined 
with reference to the dates of their joining duty in the 
Department of Medical Education. The fact that they 
have given their option for an inter-departmental transfer 
indicates that it was on their request attracting the proviso 
to Rule 27(a) of Part II of KS&SSR.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
529
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
4. The learned Single Judge has obviously overlooked the 
rigour of the proviso to Rule 27(a) of Part II of KS&SSR 
which springs into action the moment there is an inter-
departmental transfer on request. We therefore direct that 
the seniority of the optees aforesaid shall be determined 
with reference to the proviso to Rule 27(a) of Part II of 
KS&SSR and the inter se seniority list finalised…..”
25.	 The Division Bench held that once an employee has furnished his/
her option, it should be termed as ‘inter-departmental’ transfer on 
‘request’, hence, proviso to Rule 27(a) of Part II of KS&SS Rules will 
be attracted. The said proviso contemplates that seniority of such 
employees can be determined with reference to his/her date of joining 
duty in DME, which was not duly considered by the learned Single 
Judge. These findings of the Division Bench have been assailed 
before us in these Appeals. 
Rival Contentions
26.	 We may now refer the submissions of the parties. Learned Senior 
Advocate Mr. V. Giri appearing on behalf of absorbed employees 
submitted as follows – 
26.1	In the present case, the State by a ‘policy decision’ abolished 
the ‘dual control’ system of the ‘hospital staff’ between DHS 
and DME. The administrative control was given to DME, 
however, certain categories such as ‘Nursing, Paramedical and 
Ministerial Staff’ were under the governance of DHS. To do away 
with the anomaly, State by G.O. dated 25.10.2008 directed 
that all ministerial staff, nurses, paramedical staff (including 
last grade staff) working under DHS shall be brought under 
the administrative control of the DME. The G.O. specifically 
stipulated that seniority of the persons who opt for absorption 
in DME will be maintained and their ‘lien’ will be shifted. 
26.2	Pursuant thereto, out of 12044 posts, as many as 6022 posts 
(50%) were ‘shifted’ to DME. DHS employees were given an 
option either to retain their post with DHS or opt for DME on the 
very same post which they occupied in DHS. After examination, 
options of 3072 employees were found to be valid.
26.3	State vide G.O. dated 27.02.2009, directed that the Director 
of Heath Service will issue orders transferring the ‘lien’ of 
530
those 3072 employees at the disposal of DME. Further, it was 
submitted that, essentially, it was never an ‘inter-departmental’ 
transfer of the employees on their ‘request’. They were given a 
‘choice’ to exercise an ‘option’ by the State in furtherance of a 
policy decision. Making such a choice would not fall within the 
ambit of ‘request’ as stipulated in the proviso to Rule 27(a) of 
KS&SS Rules and seniority of the absorbed employees cannot 
be reckoned from the date, they joined DME.
26.4	The entire exercise was carried out by a committee set up by 
the State after due consultation and by transferring lien to DME, 
the service of the absorbed employees rendered in DHS was 
specifically protected.
27.	 Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Raghenth Basant appearing on behalf 
of the original employees straight away drew our attention to the 
proviso to Rule 27(a) of KS&SS Rules and contended that when any 
inter-departmental transfer is made on the ‘request’ of an employee, 
then in such case, his/her seniority must be reckoned from the date 
of joining the new department. To further buttress, he submitted that – 
27.1	Out of 6022 posts that stood transferred to DME from DHS, 
only 3072 posts were filled by transferring absorbed employees 
from DHS to DME. The remaining posts were filled on 
deputation. Even though the inter-departmental transfer was an 
administrative decision of the State, the Appendix II – ‘Form of 
Option’ annexed with G.O. dated 25.10.2008 reveals that the 
absorbed employees had to give a declaration as to ‘Stations 
requested for posting’ before getting transferred.
27.2	Once it is settled that it is a case of inter-departmental transfer 
subject to filling up of request for posting, proviso to Rule 
27(a) of KS&SS Rules will automatically attract for determining 
seniority of the transferred employees and as provided, it shall 
be from the date of joining duty in the new Unit. Rule 27(c) has 
no applicability in the lis at hand. 
27.3	This Hon’ble Court in ‘K.P. Sudhakaran and Another Vs. State 
of Kerala and Others1’ while dealing with issue of seniority and 
applicability of Rule 27(a) of KS&SS Rules, has categorically 
1	
(2006) 5 SCC 386
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
531
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
held that on transfer, the employee has to forego his past service 
and his seniority will be determined from the date of his joining 
duty in the new department/unit. 
27.4	Lastly, if the seniority of the original employees vis-à-vis absorbed 
employees is reckoned from the date of initial appointment of 
absorbed employees, then it will cause grave prejudice since 
original employees were never given an option. 
28.	 Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Jaideep Gupta appearing on behalf of 
the State, argued in support of the appellants – absorbed employees 
and at the outset submitted that there is no question of prejudice 
being caused to original employees for the reason that, after the 
abolition of dual control system, the original posts in DHS along 
with their promotional posts in respective category were transferred 
to DME. In other words, effectively additional posts as they existed 
in DHS were shifted to DME. The options were exercised by the 
absorbed employees only on the premise of assured seniority and 
on absorption to DME, if they are placed at the bottom of seniority 
list in the respective category, they will have to forego their previous 
service. This was never the intention of the Government of Kerala 
while taking the policy decision. 
29.	 Generally, in inter-departmental transfers, only the employee is 
transferred to the respective post, however, in the present case, the 
post itself along with the employee have been shifted. DHS employees 
were given an option to switch to DME after policy decision and 
transfer of posts to DME. The said option was never in the nature 
of request as contemplated under proviso to Rule 27(a) of KS&SS 
Rules. Hence, the said proviso has no bearing on the inter-se seniority 
between the original employees and absorbed employees.
Analysis of contentions and reasonings
30.	 After hearing learned counsel for the parties at length, in our view 
the short question which falls for consideration is ‘whether the 
option exercised by DHS employees to join DME pursuant to a 
policy decision of the State of Kerala ought to be considered as 
an option for absorption or a request for transfer under proviso 
to Rule 27(a) of KS&SS Rules and in that situation, the inter-se 
seniority of such employees in the DME shall be reckoned from 
which date?’  
532
31.	 Having perused the material placed, it is luculent that in furtherance 
to the policy decision of the Government and on account of abolition 
of the dual control system, employees of the DHS were required to 
be transferred by way of absorption to DME in public interest looking 
to the administrative exigency. In furtherance as per G.O.  (Ms.) 
No. 124/07/H&FWD dated 01.06.2007, existing staff of DHS were 
required to be switched to DME for implementation of the said 
decision. In this connection, the Government first decided to identify 
the issues and invited the stakeholders to deliberate. A meeting 
was convened under the Chairmanship of the Additional Secretary, 
Health, on 10.10.2007 and taking note of the recommendations of 
the Estimates Committees 1998-2000 and 2001-2004, it was decided 
to abolish the dual control system to increase the efficiency of public 
administration. In furtherance, the Committee framed the ‘Draft Rules 
for Option’ and ‘Draft Option Form.’ As per the Government order 
vide G.O. (Rt.) No. 1273/08/H&FWD dated 07.04.2008 and G.O. (Rt.) 
No. 2321/08/H&FWD dated 05.07.2008, the Government nominated 
nodal officers of the DHS and DME and the Administrative Officer 
from the Kerala Heart Foundation to coordinate the activities in 
connection with the implementation of abolition of dual control system. 
They prepared the list of such staff of various categories and grade 
working under their control and also the list of employees along with 
the posts for transfer to the DME. On receiving the information, the 
Government examined those in detail and was of the view that the 
existing qualification and method of appointment for the posts in 
DHS will be followed for appointment to the post after shifting them 
to DME and modification, if any, shall be considered separately. 
32.	 In consequence, the Government after partial modification in 
G.O.  (Ms.) No. 124/07/H&FWD dated 01.06.2007, issued the 
G.O. (P)  No. 548/2008/H&FWD dated 25.10.2008, and the 
recommendations made therein are enumerated as under – 
(i)	
All the ministerial staff, nurses, paramedical staff 
including the last grade staff under the establishment 
of Director Health Services and now working in the 
Medical Education Department will be brought under 
the administrative control of Director of Medical 
Education subject to filing of option in accordance 
with the Rules for option. The Rules of option is 
given in Appendix-I and Form of option is given in 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
533
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
Appendix II. The category-wise list and number of 
post as above is given in Appendix Ill. The persons 
who opt for the Medical Education Department from 
the Health Services Department will be allotted to 
the Medical Education Department based on the 
seniority in service. The option will be applicable 
only for the staff of Health Services Department. The 
staff of Health Services Department now working 
under Director of Medical Education also will have 
to file option if they wish to continue in the Medical 
Education Service.
(ii)	
The staff of Health Services Department will file 
option in the prescribed form in Appendix-II. If the 
number of persons in a particular category who opt 
to the Medical Education Department is in excess 
of the sanctioned strength of that category in 
Medical Education Service, the senior most among 
such persons will be shifted to Medical Education 
Service as per Rule 27(a) and 27(c) of Part II KS 
& SSRs, subject to their option. If sufficient options 
are not received for a particular post, the junior 
most person will be shifted to the Medical Education 
Department from the Health Services Department 
making mandatory posting according to seniority. If 
staff is in surplus in that category in Health Services 
Department, such mandatory posting will continue till 
such time Director of Health Services has no surplus 
staff under any category. 
(iii)	 The employees will file option in the prescribed 
form in Appendix II duly recommended by the head 
of office, to the Senior Administrative Officer (Dual 
Control Option Cell), Office of the Director of Health 
Services, Thiruvananthapuram. The employees shall 
file option within a period of 45 days from the date 
of this order. 
(iv)	 The option form will be scrutinized by a Cell, with the 
following staff, within a period of one month thereafter, 
that is by 15.1.2009. The Cell will function in the office 
of the Director of Health Services. 
534
(1)	 The Senior Administrative Officer, Health 
Services Department, Thiruvananthapuram 
(Convener). 
(2)	 The Administrative Officer, Medical Education 
Department, Thiruvananthapuram. 
(3)	 T h e  A d m i n i s t r a t i v e  O ff i c e r,  K e r a l a 
Heart Foundation, Medical College, 
Thiruvananthapuram. 
(4)	 The Administrative Assistant, Health Services 
Department, Thiruvananthapuram. 
(5)	 The Administrative Assistant, Medical Education 
Department, Thiruvananthapuram. 
(6)	 2 Clerks each from the Medical Education 
Department and Health Services Department, 
Thiruvananthapuram. 
(v)	
The Director of Health Services will issue orders transferring 
the employees on the basis of options received, subject 
to the Draft Rules in Appendix I, before 31.01.2009. 
The Director of Health Services and Director of Medical 
Education will identify the surplus staff thereafter, if any, 
after completion of the process, to Government and Director 
of Medical Education will identify the surplus staff in all 
categories and report to Government after 31.1.2009. 
By order of the Governor,  
Dr. Vishwas Mehta,  
Secretary (Health)”
33.	 From the above, it can clearly be spelt out that by the mechanism 
carved out, the employees of the DHS were required to be transferred 
along with the posts to DME by way of absorption in the exigency 
of public administration and necessity. The factum of absorption 
by way of transfer is clear from the declaration of Appendix II of 
G.O. dated 25.10.2008, i.e., the form prescribing details of the 
employees and attached declaration, by which it is clear that the 
employees have opted for absorption in DME and wish to continue 
and do not intend to return to DHS as referred in paragraph 15 of 
the judgment. 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
535
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
34.	 After receiving the declaration and Appendix II, the Committees of 
the officials of DHS and DME made recommendations for transferring 
3096 posts of 57 categories and accordingly, the Government of 
Kerala issued G.O. (P) No. 167/2009/H&FWD dated 17.06.2009, 
including the names and posts of those employees whose options 
were found valid. After passing such order, the issue arose regarding 
seniority of the employees absorbed in DME. In this regard, a 
clarificatory letter was issued by the Government on 24.04.2010, 
specifying that the seniority of the staff who opted for DME shall be 
reckoned as per Rule 8 of Appendix I of G.O. dated 25.10.2008 in 
terms of Rules 27(a) and 27(c) of Part II of KS&SS Rules. It was 
clarified that in case of promotion the seniority shall be reckoned from 
the date of promotion and in case of direct recruit (entry cadre) as per 
the date of first effective advice issued at the time of appointment.
35.	 The reference of above Rule 8 of Appendix I is in paragraph 14 
of the judgment whereby, the seniority of the staff who opted for 
absorption to DME will be maintained as per Rule 27(a) and 27(c) 
of Part II, KS&SS Rules. The word ‘maintained’ used for seniority 
has its own significance and be further referred for inter-se seniority 
of the absorbed employees in terms of the said Rules. 
36.	 The Rule 27(a) as quoted in paragraph 19 of judgment above 
emphasizes that seniority of a person in service in any class, category 
or grade shall be determined from the date of order of first appointment 
to the service unless he has been reduced to lower rank by way of 
punishment. Its proviso only deals with the contingencies wherein 
an employee seeks transfer on request as specified or applied 
mutually. Therefore, the proviso applies only for the contingencies 
of mutual or inter-unit or inter-departmental transfer from one unit 
to another within the same department or from one department to 
another as the case may be on request by such employee. It does 
not apply to the cases in which transfer is made by the Government 
in administrative exigency or the transfer by way of absorption under 
policy decision of the Government. 
37.	 In our view, the intent of Rules 27(a) and 27(c) is clear that seniority 
be reckoned from the order of his first appointment and the inter-se 
seniority be determined as per the date of first effective advice made 
for his appointment in service, class, category or grade as the case 
may be. The proviso of Rule 27(a) is merely an exception to the 
536
said Rule of maintaining the seniority from the date of appointment 
in the cases of ‘on request’ and mutual transfer. The said exception 
does not attract in a case of transfer by way of absorption made by 
the Government in public interest or in administrative exigencies. 
Thus, proviso to Rule 27(a) is an exception to the transfer on 
administrative grounds in public interest. The said fact is also clear 
from the Rules framed in Appendix I, and Option Form of Appendix II 
and its declaration as contained in G.O. dated 25.10.2008, by which 
the employee has furnished option for absorption without making 
any request for transfer. 
38.	 The whole dispute revolves around the interpretation of the words 
transfer on request, transfer applied mutually and transfer by way 
of absorption. In the said context, it is necessary to lay emphasis 
on the definition of transfer as given in Kerala Service Rules (KSR), 
1959, which reads as under: - 
“(36) ‘Transfer’ – means the movement of an officer 
from one headquarter station in which he is employed to 
another to such station, either, 
(a)	 to take up the duties of a new post, or
(b)	 in consequence of a change of his headquarter.”
The said definition postulates the change of headquarter or station to 
another either to take up the duties of a new post or in consequence 
of change of headquarter. Indeed, the said change may be on request 
as prescribed in proviso to Rule 27(a) of KS&SS Rules or on his/
her mutual request based on the needs of the employees who have 
applied or for administrative reason in public interest. As discussed, 
the said proviso only deals with first two contingencies and not the 
last one, i.e., transfer in public interest for administrative reason. 
39.	 The transfer of an employee is an incidence of service if it is in 
public interest. It cannot be disputed that the Government is the 
best judge to decide how to distribute and utilise the services of an 
employee. Simultaneously, if employee makes a request due to some 
hardship and if the authority or the Government as the case may 
be is satisfied, it may post such employee as per request, but such 
transfer cannot be termed as transfer in public interest because it 
is on the request of the employee and not in the exigencies of the 
public administration.  
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
537
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
40.	 Here, it is a case of transfer by way of absorption. Now, to deal with 
the meaning of absorption, we can profitably refer to the different 
glossaries. As per P. Ramanatha Aiyar’s Advanced Law Lexicon, 7th 
Edition, ‘absorption’ means ‘to take in. On absorption, the employee 
becomes part and parcel of the department absorbing him and 
partakes the same colour and character of the existing employees 
of the department.’ 
41.	 In Corpus Juris Secundum (CJS), ‘absorb’ is defined as ‘to suck up; 
to drink in, to imbibe; to draw in as a constituent part; and it has 
been said to be also a synonym of “consume”.  
42.	 On perusal of the above, it is clear that if transfer is by absorption, 
then such employee becomes part and parcel of the department 
absorbing him and partakes the same colour and character of the 
existing employees. In other words, absorb clearly indicates to suck 
up, to imbibe to draw as a constituent part and consume. 
43.	 In addition, the words option and request have different meanings 
which require further emphasis. In colloquial usage, Merriam-Webster 
defines ‘option’ as – ‘an act of choosing; the power or right to choose: 
freedom of choice; something that may be chosen’, whereas, ‘request’ 
is defined as – ‘by asking for something, usually in a formal way’. 
44.	 In legal usage, Black’s Law Dictionary defines ‘option’ as – ‘right 
or power to choose; something that may be chosen’. On the other 
hand, it defines ‘request’ as – ‘an asking or petition; the expression 
of a desire to some person for something to be granted or done’.
45.	 In P. Ramanatha Aiyar’s Advanced Law Lexicon, 7th Edition, ‘option’ 
is defined as – ‘simply choice or freedom of choice. The essential 
requisites of an option or election is that a party opting should be 
cognizant of his right. The party must have the knowledge of his or 
her right and of those circumstances which will influence the exercise 
of option. The person to whom an option is given in regard to any 
matter must be left to his own free will to take or do one thing or 
another.’ and ‘request’ is defined as ‘a demand or requirement’.
46.	 After going through the definitions, it is clear that option gives a right 
to choose with freedom of choosing amongst the choices presented 
to the person concerned, whereas a request is the desire of a person 
to be granted something by asking or is a demand or requirement 
of the employee. 
538
47.	 In the present case, the transfer has been made by way of absorption 
on the basis of option and not on the basis of request. The said 
absorption was in furtherance to a policy decision of the Government 
to abolish the dual control system enhancing the efficiency of the 
administration of medical colleges and attached hospitals thereto 
giving it to DME withdrawing from DHS. Therefore, the transfer by 
way of absorption on exercise of option as specified in Appendix I 
and Appendix II contained in G.O. dated 25.10.2008 does not attract 
the proviso to Rule 27(a) of KS&SS Rules, which only deals with 
the transfer on request or on mutual request. Thus, the action taken 
in public interest due to administrative exigency even on option is 
different than the action done on request. In our view, the proviso to 
Rule 27(a) does not attract in case of a transfer by way of absorption 
done by the Department in furtherance to the policy decision of the 
Government. Therefore, transfer by way of absorption in public interest 
cannot be equated with the transfer on request in contingencies as 
specified in proviso to Rule 27(a) or applied mutually.  
48.	 In the fact situation of the present case, the judgment of Full Bench 
of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of ‘Kartar Singh 
v. State of Punjab, 1989 SCC OnLine P&H 482’, is relevant. The 
Full Bench in a similar situation while dealing with the issue of 
seniority of Patwaris working in the State’s Consolidation Department 
who were absorbed into the Revenue Department held that the 
employees of Consolidation Department after absorption into the 
Revenue Department, will have the benefit of length of service in 
the Consolidation Department, on the new post. While concurring 
the view, in the separate note, Justice M.M. Punchhi, expressed his 
view that absorption is akin to amalgamation, in the sense that, an 
employee becomes part and parcel of the department absorbing him 
and partakes the same colour and character of the existing employees 
of the department, classified as promotees, direct appointees or 
transferees. In the facts discussed in detail above, definition of 
absorption which was based on option and the definition of request 
discussed above, we concur with the view taken by the Punjab and 
Haryana High Court by the said Full Bench. 
49.	 At this stage, the judgment relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel 
Mr. Raghenth Basant representing private respondents in the case of 
K.P. Sudhakaran and Anr. (supra) is also relevant to refer wherein 
interpretation of Rule 27 of KS&SS Rules was expressly made in the 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
539
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
context of the transfers of employees on request and maintaining the 
seniority. This Court dealt the proviso to Rule 27(a) in paragraph 11 
and observed as thus: 
“11. In service jurisprudence, the general rule is that if a 
government servant holding a particular post is transferred 
to the same post in the same cadre, the transfer will not 
wipe out his length of service in the post till the date of 
transfer and the period of service in the post before his 
transfer has to be taken into consideration in computing the 
seniority in the transferred post. But where a government 
servant is so transferred on his own request, the transferred 
employee will have to forego his seniority till the date 
of transfer, and will be placed at the bottom below the 
junior most employee in the category in the new cadre 
or department. This is because a government servant 
getting transferred to another unit or department for his 
personal considerations, cannot be permitted to disturb the 
seniority of the employees in the department to which he is 
transferred, by claiming that his service in the department 
from which he has been transferred, should be taken 
into account. This is also because a person appointed 
to a particular post in a cadre, should know the strength 
of the cadre and prospects of promotion on the basis of 
the seniority list prepared for the cadre and any addition 
from outside would disturb such prospects. The matter is, 
however, governed by the relevant service rules.”
In the case, Court dealing with clause (a) and (c) of Rule 27 of the 
said Rules further observed as under – 
“16. A careful reading of clause (c) shows that it did in no 
way affect the contents of proviso to clause (a) of Rule 27 
inserted by amendment by GO dated 13-1-1976. Clause (a) 
of Rule 27 provided that seniority of a person in a service, 
class, category or grade shall be determined by the date 
of the order of his first appointment to such service, class, 
category or grade. Clause (b) provides that the appointing 
authority shall, at the time of passing an order appointing 
two or more persons simultaneously to a service, fix the 
order of preference among them, and seniority shall be 
540
determined in accordance with it. Clause (c) made it clear 
that notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (a) 
and (b), where a person is appointed to a class, category 
or grade in a service on the advice of the Commission, the 
seniority of such person shall be determined by the date 
of first effective advice made for his appointment to such 
class, category or grade and when two or more persons 
are included in the same list of candidates advised, their 
relative seniority shall be fixed according to the order in 
which their names are arranged in the advice list. The 
effect of clause (c) is to clarify the date with reference 
to which seniority should be reckoned when they are 
initially appointed on the advice of the PSC. It only means 
that where the appointments are from the selection 
list published by PSC, their seniority will be reckoned/
determined by the first effective advice made for such 
appointment by PSC and not by the actual date of his 
appointment by the appointing authority. Clause (c) has 
therefore no effect or application over the proviso which 
regulates subsequent “own-request” transfers.”
50.	 The Court with said observations concluded that if the request is made 
for transfer by an employee and accepted by the authority, then on 
joining the transferred post, seniority be counted from the date of his 
joining at new place foregoing the previous service and advantage 
of clause (c) of Rule 27 is not available to such employee. The said 
judgment is of no help to private respondents – original employees 
since the transfer in the present case is in the administrative 
exigencies by way of absorption. As discussed above, the absorption 
based on option is completely different than the transfer on request 
and the said judgment rather fortifies the discussions made above 
and favours the case of the absorbed employees.  
51.	 In conclusion, we can observe that in furtherance to the conscious 
policy decision of the Government, abolition of dual control system 
was inevitable, therefore, bifurcation of DHS and DME was directed 
based on the recommendations. The employees existing in DHS were 
absorbed in DME along with posts and lien. In the present case, 
in terms of the G.O. (P) No. 548/2008/H&FWD dated 25.10.2008, 
particularly Rule 8 of Appendix I, seniority of the absorbed employee 
cannot be disturbed applying the proviso of Rule 27(a) of KS&SS 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
541
Geetha V.M. & Ors. v. Rethnasenan K. & Ors.
Rules. Learned Senior counsel representing the State has supported 
the said view pointing out that while forming the policy for transfer 
by way of Appendix I, II and III, the Government never intended 
to forgo the seniority of the employees in any class, category and 
grade existing in service of DHS and absorbed in DME. Therefore, 
the Government has specifically mentioned in Rule 8 of Appendix I 
that the seniority of such employee shall be ‘maintained’ as per 
Rule 27(a) and 27(c) of Part II of KS&SS Rules giving due weightage 
to the service rendered by them in DHS while absorbing in DME. 
52.	 In totality of facts as discussed, the inescapable conclusion that can 
be drawn is that the transfer of appellants – absorbed employees was 
by way of absorption as per the policy decision of the Government of 
Kerala and it would not fall within the purview of proviso to Rule 27(a) 
of KS&SS Rules. The appellants exercised the option for absorption 
by transfer from DHS to DME in line with the policy decision taken 
by Government of Kerala and not on their own volition. Such being 
the situation, it cannot be considered as a case of transfer based on 
voluntary choice or own request. Their seniority and inter-se seniority 
shall be maintained as per Rule 27(a) and 27(c) of Part II of KS&SS 
Rules read with clarificatory letter dated 24.04.2010 with reference 
to Rule 8 of Appendix I to G.O. dated 25.10.2008. The question as 
framed by us in paragraph 30 is answered accordingly.
53.	 In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the considered 
opinion that the findings recorded by the Division Bench reversing 
the judgment of learned Single Judge are without due consideration 
of the material placed and based on wrong interpretation of rules. 
Therefore, such findings and the judgment stand set-aside. 
54.	 Resultantly, the present appeals are allowed. The State of Kerala 
is directed to draw the seniority list of DME employees, including 
original and absorbed employees, reckoning the seniority of the 
absorbed employees as directed in paragraph 52 above. Pending 
interlocutory applications (if any) stand disposed-of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey