[2025] 5 S.C.R. 435 : 2025 INSC 468
M/s Chatha Service Station 
v. 
Lalmati Devi & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 5089-5092 of 2025)
08 April 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia and K. Vinod Chandran,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the Tribunal was justified in directing the insurer to pay 
the award amount and recover it from the owner and driver of the 
offending vehicle carrying hazardous goods, in view of the absence 
of an endorsement in the driving licence of the driver as required 
under s.11 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 r/w r.9 of the Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989.
Headnotes†
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 – ss.11, 14, 41 – Central Motor 
Vehicles Rules, 1989 – r.9 – Motor accident involving an oil 
tanker killing a bicyclist and a pedestrian – Tribunal directed 
the insurer to pay the award and recover it from the owner 
and driver of the offending vehicle, since the driver did not 
have a valid licence to drive a vehicle carrying dangerous 
and hazardous goods in view of lack of endorsement on his 
licence as required u/s.11 r/w r.9 – High Court affirmed the 
order to pay and recover – Correctness:
Held: r.9 deals with the professional skill of driving a specially 
designed vehicle carrying dangerous or hazardous goods – The 
accident was caused due to “rash and negligent driving of the 
vehicle” which the driver was not entitled to drive because of lack 
of endorsement on his licence as required u/s.11 r/w r.9 – The 
breach of non-compliance of the statutory requirement to undergo 
a training course to upskill the driving efficiency and product safety 
cannot be brushed aside as a technical breach not contributing to 
the accident – Admittedly, the driver did not have a licence having 
an endorsement as required under the Act and the Rules to drive a 
vehicle carrying dangerous and hazardous goods – The offending 
vehicle; the oil tanker, was a vehicle intended to carry goods of 
* Author
436
Supreme Court Reports
dangerous and hazardous nature – Further, the training certificate 
was produced at the appellate stage for the first time without any 
explanation for its non-production before the Tribunal, raising 
genuine suspicion on veracity of certificate and was rightly found 
not acceptable as per Or. 41 R. 27, CPC – Appeals dismissed, 
direction to the insurance company to pay and recover, affirmed. 
[Paras 11, 10, 16-19]
Interpretation of Statutes – Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 – ss.2, 10, 
11 – Additions to driving licence – Words ‘class’ or ‘description’ 
in s.11, used disjunctively not alternatively: 
Held: s.10 enumerates the various classes of vehicles for which 
license is granted and goods vehicle, simpliciter and those designed 
to carry dangerous and hazardous goods, fall within the class of 
‘transport vehicle’ – Further, clause (j) of s.10(2) specifically speaks 
of ‘motor vehicle of a specified description’ – s.11 in relation to 
additions to driving licence, speaks of an existing driving licence 
to which any other class or description of motor vehicles can be 
added entitling the holder to thus drive a motor vehicle of more 
than one class or description – By the use of the words ‘class’ or 
‘description’ independently, it is clear that the statute has used it 
disjunctively and not alternatively – This interpretation is in tune 
with the statutory scheme, which defines u/s.2 of the definition 
clause, vehicles of varying description like goods vehicle, heavy 
passenger vehicle medium goods vehicle and so on and so forth. 
[Para 13]
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 – ss.3, 149 – ‘Effective license’ and 
‘duly licensed’ – Distinction and various contingencies in 
which the insurer are absolved from their liability to indemnify, 
as discussed in Swaran Singh’s case, enumerated. [Para 15]
Case Law Cited
National Insurance Co. Ltd vs. Swaran Singh [2004] 1 SCR 180 : 
(2004) 3 SCC 297 – referred to.
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. K. Ramasamy, 2006 SCC OnLine 
Mad 963; United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. A. Verlaxmi, 2013 
SCC OnLine Chh 272; National Insurance Company v. Harbans 
Kaur, FAO Nos. 1210 & 8292 of 2004 decided on 26.03.2018 – 
referred to.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
437
M/s Chatha Service Station v. Lalmati Devi & Ors.
List of Acts
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989; 
Civil Procedure Code, 1908.
List of Keywords
Motor accident; Oil tanker; Lack of endorsement on driving licence; 
Vehicle carrying dangerous and hazardous goods; Pay and recover; 
Insurance company to pay and recover; Rule 9 of Central Motor 
Vehicles Rules, 1989; Breach of policy condition; Insurance liability; 
Training certificate; Order 41 Rule 27 CPC; ‘Class’ or ‘description’ 
of motor vehicles; Effective license; Duly licensed; Rash and 
negligent driving; Statutory requirement; Upskill driving efficiency; 
Transport vehicle.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 5089-5092 
of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 07.02.2019 and 14.05.2019 
of the High Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in FAO 
No. 3250 and 3252 of 2015 and RACR No. 21 and 22 of 2019 
respectively
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Pai Amit, Tushar Bakshi. 
Advs. for the Respondents:
T. Mahipal, Rohit Kumar Sinha.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K. Vinod Chandran, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The above four appeals are filed from the orders in two first appeals 
by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, arising from two separate 
orders of the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal and the orders in two 
438
Supreme Court Reports
Review Applications filed from the aforesaid orders in first appeals, 
both of which stood rejected. 
3.	
Before us, the appeals are filed by the owner of the offending 
vehicle involved in the motor accident, in which the breadwinners 
of the claimants’ family, who were respectively; riding a bicycle and 
a pedestrian, died in the accident involving an oil tanker. The First 
Information Report was registered against the driver of the oil tanker 
which was rashly and negligently driven, by reason of which it hit the 
bicyclist and the pedestrian. The Tribunal found negligence based 
on the FIR registered and the deposition of CW2, who was an eye-
witness. Ext. C1-FIR and Ext.C3-Charge Sheet points to the rash and 
negligent driving of the oil tanker, which stands corroborated by the 
deposition of CW2: eye-witness. The awards were passed in both 
the claim petitions, the quantum of which has not been challenged by 
the owner of the offending vehicle; the oil tanker, either in the High 
Court or this Court. Having fixed the quantum, the Tribunal directed 
the insurance company to pay the award amounts and recover it 
from the owner and driver of the offending vehicle, since the driver 
did not have a valid licence to drive a vehicle carrying dangerous 
and hazardous goods. Appeals were filed before the High Court by 
the owner of the oil tanker, against the order to pay and recover. The 
review applications were also filed against the very same direction 
by the owner of the oil tanker; the offending vehicle, both of which 
stood rejected. 
4.	
Before us, the learned Counsel appearing for the appellant only 
argued on the direction to pay and recover as issued to the insurance 
company. It was argued based on decisions of different High Courts 
that as long as there is no case that the accident occurred due to 
the dangerous and hazardous goods carried in the vehicle, the 
absence of an endorsement as required under Rule 9 of Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules, 19891, would not result in a finding of breach 
of the policy conditions. The vehicle at the time of accident was not 
carrying any dangerous or hazardous goods, is also the submission. 
Moreover, the learned Counsel for the appellant, also pointed out that 
there was a certificate produced in the first appeal which indicated 
that the driver had undergone the three days training course, which 
1	
“the Rules
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
439
M/s Chatha Service Station v. Lalmati Devi & Ors.
equipped him to drive the offending vehicle even when it was loaded 
and the absence of an endorsement is a venial breach.
5.	
The learned Counsel for the insurance company pointed out that 
under Rule 14 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 19882, the driver of a 
goods vehicle carrying dangerous and hazardous goods is required 
to undergo a training as prescribed under Rule 9 of the Rules and 
is further required to get an endorsement of such training having 
been undergone, in the transport vehicle license possessed by him. 
The driver who was examined before the Tribunal clearly accepted 
that there was no such endorsement made in his driving licence. 
The driver also stated that at the time of the accident, there was 
oil carried in the tanker. The respondent-insurer submits that the 
High Court has rightly declined reliance on the training certificate 
produced in the first appeal, finding it to be not acceptable as per 
Order 41 Rule 27 of the Civil Procedure Code, 19083 and further, 
emphasised the absence of an endorsement made in the driving 
licence.
6.	
We have looked at Section 14 of the Act, the proviso to which; as it 
stood at the time of the accident, restricted the validity of a license to 
drive a transport vehicle carrying goods of dangerous and hazardous 
nature to one year and required a one day refresher course in the 
prescribed syllabus, for its renewal. Pertinent is Section 11, with 
the nominal heading ‘Additions to driving license’, sub-section (1) 
of which requires any addition to an existing license to drive any 
class or description of motor vehicle to be procured by making an 
application for the same to any licensing authority in the State and 
sub-section (2) makes the consideration of the application so filed, 
subject to the rules prescribed by the Central Government and the 
provisions of Section 9; which provision speaks generally about 
‘Grant of driving license’. 
7.	
We will first notice the decisions of the High Courts relied on 
by the appellant before us. In National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. 
K.  Ramasamy,4 the High Court of Judicature at Madras was 
concerned with a similar case where breach was alleged by the 
2	
“the Act”
3	
“the C.P.C.”
4	
2006 SCC OnLine Mad 963
440
Supreme Court Reports
insurer for reason of absence of endorsement as prescribed under 
Rule 9 of the Rules, in the heavy goods vehicle licence obtained 
by the driver of the offending vehicle. It was held by the learned 
Single Judge that it was for the insurer to establish breach and 
even when it is so established the insurer would not be allowed 
to avoid its liability unless the said breach is so fundamental to 
have contributed to the cause of the accident; which the absence 
of endorsement does not qualify as fundamental. The reasoning 
was also that the purpose of the training was to equip the driver to 
meet exigencies of spillage of the dangerous or hazardous goods 
transported in the vehicle. It was held on the facts of that case, the 
accident occurred only by reason of the rash and negligent driving 
of the vehicle and the absence of training cannot be attributed as 
a cause of the accident. 
8.	
Reliance was also placed on National Insurance Co. Ltd vs. Swaran 
Singh5 to hold that “the main purpose of the qualification and training 
prescribed in Rule 9 of the Rules seems to equip the driver of the 
tanker lorries transporting hazardous substances to meet certain 
emergencies and to make him aware of certain basic emergency 
procedures, in case if any spillage of hazardous substances 
transported in the vehicle is caused due to an accident.” (sic). We 
are afraid, the High Court erroneously made the above observations, 
despite extracting Rule 9; as we will shortly demonstrate, and failed 
to appreciate that there was no extraneous cause attributable to 
the accident, as spoken of in Swaran Singh,5 but for the defective 
driving of the goods vehicle carrying hazardous goods, the driving 
of which itself would require special training.
9.	
Likewise in United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. A. Verlaxmi,6 the 
Chhattisgarh High Court considering the absence of an endorsement 
under Rule 9 held that the endorsement neither increases the 
efficiency of the driver nor by its absence reduces such efficiency 
in any manner. It was categorically held that “for driving such a 
vehicle, no further expertise or driving skill is required,” (sic) which 
interpretation unfortunately does not flow from a plain reading of 
Rule 9 and the syllabus prescribed therein. 
5	
(2004) 3 SCC 297
6	
2013 SCC OnLine Chh 272
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
441
M/s Chatha Service Station v. Lalmati Devi & Ors.
10.	 The Punjab and Haryana High Court also in National Insurance 
Company v. Harbans Kaur,7 held that “perusal of Rule 9 of the Rules 
would make it evident that before a driver can file an application for 
obtaining necessary endorsement as required under sub-rule (3) of 
Rule 9 of the Rules, he is to undergo some training for a period of two 
to three days but the same does not deal with the professional skill 
of driving. With regard to professional skill of driving, it has already 
been clarified by the licensing authority at the time of granting licence 
to the driver authorizing him to drive a transport vehicle” (sic). Rule 
9 as we will presently see demonstrates otherwise and deals with 
the professional skill of driving a specially designed vehicle carrying 
dangerous or hazardous goods.
11.	 Rule 9 requires that “any person driving a goods carriage carrying 
goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life shall, in 
addition to being the holder of a driving licence to drive a transport 
vehicle, also has the ability to read and write at least one Indian 
language specified in the VIIIth Schedule of the Constitution of India 
and English and also possess a certificate of having successfully 
passed a course consisting of the syllabus detailed thereunder”. 
The syllabus stipulated cannot be found to be that which is confined 
to proper care being taken of the dangerous or hazardous goods 
carried in the vehicle; which is only one part of the three-part syllabus 
tabulated in the Rules as parts ‘A’, ‘B’ & ‘C’. Parts ‘A’ & ‘B’ specifically 
emphasise the driving skill and efficiency that is required while carrying 
dangerous or hazardous goods; the Product Safety, including Product 
Information and Emergency Procedures having been delineated in 
Part ‘C’. The syllabus in Part ‘A’ includes defensive driving and Part 
‘B’ is with respect to advanced driving skills and training. Under 
‘Product Safety’ comes the emergency procedures to deal with 
spillage handling, firefighting, toxic release control, first aid, use of 
protective equipment etc. The statute having provided for a course 
of three days and the rules having prescribed the syllabus; which 
prescription is not confined to the product safety or safe handling 
of goods, while in transportation or when put in danger, we cannot 
find the absence of such endorsement of the training course having 
been undertaken to be a venial breach, not absolving the Insurance 
Company of its liability.
7	
FAO Nos. 1210 & 8292 of 2004 decided on 26.03.2018
442
Supreme Court Reports
12.	 We have to also emphasise that in the present case, the tanker was 
carrying oil; for which it is intended, while the accident occurred. 
We hasten to add that we may not be misunderstood as agreeing 
to the corollary to the argument that a licence holder without the 
endorsement under Rule 9, could drive an empty goods vehicle 
intended to carry hazardous goods, designed specifically for that 
purpose. The breach of non-compliance of the statutory requirement 
to undergo a training course to upskill the driving efficiency and 
product safety cannot be brushed aside as a technical breach not 
contributing to the accident.
13.	 We are conscious of the fact that Section 10 enumerates the various 
classes of vehicles for which license is granted and goods vehicle, 
simpliciter and those designed to carry dangerous and hazardous 
goods, fall within the class of ‘transport vehicle’. Clause (j) of Section 
10(2) specifically speaks of ‘motor vehicle of a specified description’. 
Section 11; in relation to additions to driving licence, speaks of an 
existing driving licence to which any other class or description of 
motor vehicles can be added entitling the holder to thus drive a motor 
vehicle of more than one class or description. By the use of the 
words ‘class’ or ‘description’ independently, it is clear that the statute 
has used it disjunctively and not alternatively. This interpretation is 
in tune with the statutory scheme, which defines under Section 2 
of the definition clause, vehicles of varying description like goods 
vehicle, heavy passenger vehicle medium goods vehicle and so on 
and so forth.
14.	 Further, Section 41 dealing with how registrations are to be carried 
out, by sub-section (4) empowers the Central Government to specify 
the type of motor vehicles, having regard to the design, construction 
and use of motor vehicles and bring out notifications in the Official 
Gazette, specifying the type of a motor vehicle to be included in 
the registration certificate along with other particulars required. The 
Central Government has brought out notifications under the above 
provision, presently vide S.O.1248 (E) dated 05.11.2004, which 
specifies good carriers, trucks, tankers or mail carriers as a different 
type of vehicle. It is with the above description in mind that we have 
to look at Rule 9 of the Rules.
15.	 Swaran Singh5 distinguished an ‘effective licence’ as used in Section 
3 of the Act and the words ‘duly licenced’ used in Section 149 of 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
443
M/s Chatha Service Station v. Lalmati Devi & Ors.
the Act; as it existed before the amendment of 2019. The said 
decision considered the various contingencies in which the insurer 
could absolve themselves from their liability to indemnify. These 
contingencies were in relation to the driver of the offending vehicle, (i) 
having a licence of one type, at the time of accident driving another 
type of vehicle (ii) procuring a fake licence; (iii) possessing a learner’s 
licence and (iv) admittedly having not obtained a license. We are 
concerned in the present case, with a situation where the driver 
of the offending goods vehicle having licence to drive a transport 
vehicle, under which class a goods vehicle falls; which however 
does not enable him to drive a goods vehicle carrying dangerous & 
hazardous goods. To enable this a transport vehicle licence holder; 
which vehicle includes the description of a goods carriage vehicle, 
will have to submit an application and obtain an endorsement under 
Section 11 read with Rule 9 of the Act and Rules. As has been held 
in Swaran Singh5 it is incumbent on the Court/Tribunal considering 
a case of a licensee driving another type of vehicle, for which he 
has not obtained a licence, to take a decision as to whether this fact 
was the main or contributory cause of negligence. This factum of 
absence of licence to drive another type of vehicle is inconsequential 
if that is not the main or contributory cause of accident. It was so 
held in Swaran Singh5:
“… In each case, on evidence led before the Tribunal, 
a decision has to be taken whether the fact of the 
driver possessing licence for one type of vehicle but 
found driving another type of vehicle, was the main or 
contributory cause of accident. If on facts, it is found that 
the accident was caused solely because of some other 
unforeseen or intervening causes like mechanical failures 
and similar other causes having no nexus with the driver 
not possessing requisite type of licence, the insurer will not 
be allowed to avoid its liability merely for technical breach 
of conditions concerning driving licence.” [sic. Para 89]
16.	 In the present case there was a contention taken by the driver of the 
vehicle who was examined before the Tribunal that he swerved the 
vehicle to save pedestrians and this caused the accident. However, 
the deposition of CW2, the eye-witness goes contrary to the said 
self-serving statement of the driver, coupled with the fact that the 
charge sheet also was against the driver, for the offence of causing 
444
Supreme Court Reports
death by reason of rash and negligent driving. The eye-witness clearly 
deposed that the accident was caused by the reason of “rash and 
negligent driving of the vehicle” which the driver was not entitled to 
drive for reason of lack of endorsement on his licence as required 
under Section 11 read with Rule 9 of the Act and Rules.
17.	 Admittedly, the driver did not have a licence as required under the Act 
and the Rules to drive a vehicle carrying dangerous and hazardous 
goods. There is also no dispute that the offending vehicle; the oil 
tanker, was a vehicle intended to carry goods of dangerous and 
hazardous nature. The contention taken by the owner of the offending 
vehicle that there was no goods carried at the time of the accident, 
was negated by both the Tribunal and the High Court finding from 
the testimony of the driver that it was carrying oil at the relevant time.
18.	 We also perfectly agree with the findings of the High Court that 
the production of the certificate at the stage of the appeal is not 
worthy of acceptance looking at the contours of Order 41 Rule 27 
of the C.P.C. Admittedly, the certificate was not produced before 
the Tribunal and hence, there is no question arising of the Court 
from which the appeal arises having refused to accept the evidence 
proffered. There was also no explanation for non-production of the 
certificate before the Tribunal; which was produced at the appellate 
stage for the first time. Only if there is a satisfactory explanation for 
the non-production before the original court, i.e. despite exercise of 
due diligence or the same was not within the knowledge of the party 
or it could not be produced despite exercise of due diligence, could 
there be an acceptance of the document at the appellate stage. In 
the present case, not only was there any explanation offered by 
the owner of the vehicle, but also the driver was present before the 
Tribunal and examined; when such a contention was not taken by 
him. The transport vehicle driving licence produced by the driver, 
admittedly did not have an endorsement. The driver also did not 
have a claim that he had undergone a training as prescribed under 
the Rules; despite being cross-examined on the point of absence 
of a valid license. 
19.	 This raises genuine suspicion on the veracity of the certificate 
produced at the appellate stage. We have looked at the certificate 
as pointed out by the learned Counsel, a copy of which is available 
in the record. The document certifies the driver to have successfully 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
445
M/s Chatha Service Station v. Lalmati Devi & Ors.
completed a three-day training course between 13.01.2012 to 
16.01.2012 in line with Rule 9 of the Rules. It is also seen from the 
certificate that the institution is approved by the Punjab Government. 
However, we have to notice that there is no serial number of issuance 
in the said document nor is there a round seal of the institution which 
issued the certificate affixed. The licence of the driver also did not 
have an endorsement as required under the Act. We find absolutely 
no reason to entertain the appeals and dismiss the same affirming 
the direction to the insurance company to pay the amounts to the 
claimants and recover it from the owner of the oil-tanker. 
20.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey