[2025] 1 S.C.R. 184 : 2025 INSC 30
Frank Vitus 
v. 
Narcotics Control Bureau and Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No(s). 2814-2815 of 2024)
06 January 2025
[Abhay S. Oka* and Ujjal Bhuyan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether it is necessary to implead a Foreign Registration Officer 
appointed under Rule 3 of the Registration of Foreigners Rules, 
1992 in the bail application filed by a foreigner within the meaning 
of the Foreigners Act, 1946.
Headnotes†
Foreigners Act, 1946 – ss.3, 2(a), 14 – Registration of Foreigners 
Rules, 1992 – r.3 – Foreigners Order, 1948 – Clause 5 – Civil 
Authority or the Registration Officer, if can oppose bail 
application filed by a foreign national and whether they ought 
to be made a party in such bail applications:
Held: No – The authorities under the Foreigners Act and the 
Foreigners Order have no locus to oppose bail application filed 
by a foreigner unless bail is sought where the allegation is of the 
offence punishable under Section 14 of the Foreigners Act – The 
impleadment of the Civil Authority or Registration Officer in all bail 
applications filed by foreigners may result in unnecessary delay in 
deciding the bail applications – While granting bail to a foreigner 
within the meaning of the Act, the concerned court shall direct the 
State or prosecuting agency, to immediately communicate the order 
granting bail to the concerned Registration Officer appointed under 
Rule 3 of the Rules who, shall further communicate the order to all 
concerned authorities including the Civil Authorities. [Paras 6, 8]
List of Acts
Foreigners Act, 1946; Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992; 
Foreigners Order, 1948.
*Author
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
185
Frank Vitus v. Narcotics Control Bureau and Ors.
List of Keywords
Foreigner; Foreign national; Foreigners Act; Registration of 
Foreigners Rules; Foreigners Order; Bail application filed by a 
foreigner; Civil Authority; Foreign Registration Officer;  Impleadment; 
Party to a bail application.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal Nos. 
2814-2815 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 31.05.2022 and 18.08.2022 
of the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in BA No. 4187 of 2020
Appearances for Parties
Vinay Navare, Sr. Adv., Amicus Curiae.
Varun Mishra, Ankur Jain, Anirudha Singh Rajavat, Sanchit Jain, 
Ajay Sharma, Advs. for the Appellant.
Vikramjeet Banerjee, A.S.G., Ashok Panigrahi, Sr. Adv., Prashant 
Rawat, Advitiya Awasthi, Annirudh Sharma, Akshat Kaushik, Amrish 
Kumar, Gurmeet Singh Makker, Venkata Raghu Vamsy Dasika, 
Upendra Mishra, Rahul G Tanwani, Prasenjeet Mohapatra, Arvind 
Kumar Sharma, Abhishek Singh, Raj Bahadur Yadav, Lzafeer 
Ahmad B. F., M/s. Trilegal, Advs. for the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
Abhay S. Oka, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.	
By judgment and order dated 08th July, 2024, two main issues 
concerning bail conditions were decided. Now, the issue that remains 
to be answered is whether it is necessary to implead a Foreign 
Registration Officer appointed under Rule 3 of the Registration of 
Foreigners Rules, 1992 (for short ‘the Rules’) in the bail application 
filed by a foreigner within the meaning of the Foreigners Act, 1946 
(for short ‘the Act’). Under Section 2(a) of the Act, a foreigner means 
a person who is not a citizen of India.
186
2.	
Under Section 3 of the Act, there is a power vested in the Central 
Government to issue an order making provisions either generally 
or concerning any particular foreigner or class of foreigners of 
prohibiting, regulating or restricting the entry of foreigners into India 
or their departure therefrom or their presence or continued presence. 
Under clause (g) of Section 3(2), a power has been conferred on 
the Central Government to issue an order directing that a foreigner 
shall be arrested or detained or confined. 
3.	
In the exercise of the power conferred under Section 3 of the Act, 
the Foreigners Order, 1948 (for short, ‘the Order’) has been issued. 
Clause 2(2) of the Order provides for appointing a Civil Authority 
by the Central Government. Clause 5 of the Order deals with the 
power to grant permission to depart from India. Clause 5 of the 
Order reads thus: 
“5. Power to grant permission to depart from India.
(1)	 No foreigner shall leave India:-
(a)	 otherwise than at such port or other recognised 
place of departure on the borders of India as 
a Registration Officer having jurisdiction at that 
port or place may appoint in this behalf, either 
for foreigners generally or for any specified class 
or description of foreigners; or
(b)	 without the leave of the civil authority having 
jurisdiction at such port or place.
(2)	 Leave shall be refused if the civil authority is 
satisfied that
(a)	 the foreigner has failed to comply with the 
formalities of departure prescribed under the 
Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1939;
(b)	 the foreigners presence is required in India 
to answer a criminal charge;
(c)	
the foreigners departure will prejudice the 
relations of the Central Government with a 
foreign power;
(d)	 the departure of the foreigner has been prohibited 
under an order issued by a competent authority.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
187
Frank Vitus v. Narcotics Control Bureau and Ors.
(3)	 (a)	 Notwithstanding anything contained in the above 
sub-paragraphs, a civil authority may prohibit 
the departure of a foreigner where it is satisfied 
that such departure would not be conducive to 
the public interest.
(b)	 Whenever a civil authority issues an order under 
clause (a), it shall report the matter forthwith to 
the Central Government which may cancel or 
modify the order in such manner as it thinks fit.”
(emphasis added) 
Under sub-clause (2) of clause 5, leave must be refused by the Civil 
Authority if it is satisfied that the foreigner’s presence is required in 
India to answer a criminal charge. 
4.	
Shri Vinay Navare, learned senior counsel appointed as Amicus 
Curiae, has suggested that considering the powers vested in Civil 
Authorities under the Order, it will be appropriate to direct that while 
considering the prayer for granting bail in case of a foreign national 
who is accused of serious offences, a notice should be issued to the 
Civil Authority so that the said authority can be heard on the prayer for 
grant of bail and on bail conditions, in the event the court is inclined 
to grant bail. Shri. Vikramjeet Banerjee, learned Additional Solicitor 
General of India has also submitted that it is always advisable to 
give notice of the bail application to the authorities under the Act 
and the Rules. 
5.	
Under clause (b) of Section 3(2) of the Act, there is a power vested in 
the Central Government to issue an order generally or with respect to 
any particular foreigner or class of foreigners that they shall not depart 
from India or shall depart subject to observance of such conditions 
on departure as may be prescribed. The Rules do not impose any 
such restriction on departure from India. However, as noted earlier, 
according to clause 5(1)(b) of the Order, no foreigner shall leave India 
without the leave of the Civil Authority having jurisdiction. When a 
foreigner’s presence is required in India to answer a criminal charge, 
permission to leave India must be refused. Under the Order, the Civil 
Authority can impose restrictions on the movements of a foreigner. 
Therefore, once a foreigner is released on bail, he cannot leave India 
without the permission of the Civil Authority, as provided in clause 5 
of the Order. Under clause 11 and other clauses of the Order, various 
188
restrictions can be imposed on a foreigner while he is in India. The 
said power is wholly independent of the power to grant bail. As of 
today, there is no order passed by the Central Government for giving 
effect to clause (g) of Section 3(2) of the Act. In any event, even if 
such an order is issued, the power to arrest or detain a foreigner 
under the Act is independent of the power of the criminal court to 
grant bail. Notwithstanding the bail granted by a criminal court, the 
power to arrest and detain a foreigner can be exercised, provided 
the Central Government makes an order in terms of clause (g) of 
Section 3(2) of the Act. 
6.	
Therefore, we do not see any propriety in issuing a direction that 
either the Civil Authority or the Registration Officer should be made 
a party to a bail application filed by a foreigner or a notice of the 
bail application be issued to the said authorities. The reason is that 
the authorities under the Act and the Order have no locus to oppose 
bail application filed by a foreigner unless bail is sought where the 
allegation is of the offence punishable under Section 14 of the Act. 
The impleadment of the Civil Authority or Registration Officer in all 
bail applications filed by foreigners may result in unnecessary delay 
in deciding the bail applications. 
7.	
All that can be done is that while releasing a foreigner on bail, the 
Court should direct the investigating agency or the State, as the case 
may be, to immediately inform the concerned Registration Officer 
appointed under Rule 3 of the Rules about the grant of bail so that 
the Registration Officer can bring the fact of the grant of bail to the 
notice of concerned Civil Authority. 
8.	
In addition to what we held by judgment and order dated 08th July, 2024, 
we issue the following directions: 
(i)	
While granting bail to a foreigner within the meaning of the 
Act, the concerned court shall issue direction to the State 
or prosecuting agency, as the case may be, to immediately 
communicate the order granting bail to the concerned 
Registration Officer appointed under Rule 3 of the Rules 
who, in turn, shall communicate the order to all concerned 
authorities including the Civil Authorities. If such information 
is furnished, it will enable the authorities under the Act, the 
Rules and the Order to take appropriate steps in accordance 
with the law; and
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
189
Frank Vitus v. Narcotics Control Bureau and Ors.
(ii)	
A copy of this order shall be forwarded to Registrar Generals 
of all the High Courts, who in turn will forward the copies of the 
order to all the criminal courts in the respective States. 
9.	
The Criminal Appeals shall be treated as disposed of in terms of the 
judgment and order dated 08th July, 2024 and this order. 
10.	 We appreciate the valuable assistance rendered by Shri Vinay 
Navare, learned senior counsel appointed as Amicus Curiae and Shri 
Vikramjeet Banerjee, learned Additional Solicitor General of India. 
Result of the case: Appeals disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey