[2025] 10 S.C.R. 1 : 2025 INSC 1074
Phireram 
v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 3830 of 2025)
02 September 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala and Sandeep Mehta, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court erred in passing the impugned order, 
by which it disposed of the application filed by the appellant-
complainant seeking cancellation of bail of the accused persons 
on the ground of threats being administered to the witnesses in 
violation of the condition imposed at the time of release on bail, 
holding that the appellant as an aggrieved person had a remedy 
under Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 and declining to cancel 
the bail of the accused persons.
Headnotes†
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 – s.439(2) – Cancellation of 
bail  – Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 – FIR registered, 
accused persons were arrested and thereafter were released 
on bail by the High Court, subject to certain terms and 
conditions – Case of the appellant-complainant that thereafter, 
respondent no.2-accused started administering threats to 
the witnesses – FIRs lodged by the witness to whom threats 
were administered  – Appellant sought cancellation of bail 
of the accused persons on the ground that threats were 
being administered to the witnesses and thus, there was 
violation of the conditions imposed at the time of release on 
bail – High Court declined to cancel the bail and held that 
appellant has remedy under the Witness Protection Scheme, 
2018 – Challenge to:
Held: 1.1 When it is an outright case of breach of the conditions 
of the bail order and when the original first informant is able to 
prima facie demonstrate in what manner the accused person is 
abusing the liberty granted to him, then, in such circumstances, the 
provisions of the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 have hardly any 
role to play – The Witness Protection Scheme is not an alternative 
to the provisions of the erstwhile CrPC and the Bharatiya Nagarik 
2
Supreme Court Reports
Suraksha Sanhita (BNSS), 2023 in so far as cancellation of bail 
is concerned. [Paras 18, 19]
1.2 This Scheme has nothing to do as such when the complainant 
seeks cancellation of bail on the ground of threats being administered 
to the witnesses – The existence of a Witness Protection Scheme 
cannot be a consideration to decline to cancel the bail, even 
when there is prima-facie material indicating that the accused 
administered threats or caused intimidation to the witnesses – To 
substitute one for the other is to denude the court of its authority 
and render the provisions of bail cancellation otiose and thereby 
make a mockery of the conditions imposed while granting bail. 
[Paras 18, 39]
1.3 Violation of conditions of bail is a ground for cancellation of bail 
as a matter of duty enjoined upon the court who whilst enlarging the 
infracting accused on bail, allowed such violation to ensue under 
its watch – Courts cannot abdicate their role on the pretext that 
since the State has a scheme for protecting witnesses, they shall 
not exercise their jurisdiction to cancel bail even though conditions 
have been violated. [Paras 42, 44]
1.4 From a bare perusal of the Scheme, it is evident that the 
considerations for when the recourse to the Scheme may be taken 
by any witness is not contingent upon violation of a condition 
imposed on an accused during grant of bail or even during its 
pendency – Witness Protection Scheme does not displace or dilute 
the established jurisprudence of bail; rather, it works alongside it, 
providing a protective canopy so that the existing provisions can 
operate in an environment where witnesses are free to testify – The 
law on bail restrains the accused through conditions, and prevents 
any further infractions of intimidation by cancellation of bail while 
the Witness Protection Scheme eradicate the invisible yet potent 
influence of fear, intimidation or threat, that are the consequences 
of the threats made by the accused persons to maintain the sanctity 
of trial. [Paras 47, 52]
1.5 The considerations that must weigh with the court for setting 
aside the bail order include any supervening circumstances that 
might have occurred after granting relief to the accused, the 
conduct of the accused while on bail, any attempt on the part of 
the accused to procrastinate, resulting in delaying the trial, any 
instance of threats being extended to the witnesses while on bail, 
any attempt on the part of the accused to tamper with the evidence 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
3
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
in any manner etc – Impugned order set aside, matter remanded 
to the High Court. [Paras 59, 62]
Cancellation of Bail – Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 – 
Witness Protection Scheme vis-à-vis provisions on grant or 
cancellation of bail – Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 is 
curative in nature while bail cancellation is a preventive – 
Distinction between the grant of bail and its cancellation on 
the ground of violation of the conditions of bail order and 
the affording of protection to a witness under the Witness 
Protection Scheme:
Held: The Witness Protection Scheme is a remedial and curative 
measure, designed to neutralise the effects of threats once they 
have materialised – Whereas, bail cancellation is a preventive 
and supervisory function of the criminal court, whose very duty is 
to ensure that the trial proceeds unpolluted by intimidation – The 
former is a positive obligation of the State, whereas the latter is 
judicial in nature, flowing from the inherent power of the courts to 
ensure that justice is done under its watch – The protection granted 
by the Scheme is limited – Effect of cancellation of bail, when 
the accused person so released, violated any of the conditions 
imposed therein, stated. [Para 38, 45, 52]
Judicial Deprecation – Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 – 
Not a substitute for cancellation of bail – Practice prevailing 
in the Allahabad High Court wherein catena of cyclostyled 
template orders are being passed proceeding on an incorrect 
assumption of the law that the Witness Protection Scheme is a 
substitute for cancellation of bail – Deprecated. [Paras 60, 61]
Cancellation of Bail – Principles governing – Discussed. 
[Paras 57-59]
Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 – Legislative history; scope, 
object and purpose of – Discussed. [Paras 19-30, 46, 50-52]
Case Law Cited
Zahira Habibullah Sheikh v. State of Gujarat [2004] 3 SCR 1050 : 
(2004) 4 SCC 158; Mahender Chawla v. Union of India [2018] 
14 SCR 627 : (2019) 14 SCC 615; Gudikanti Narasimhulu v. 
Public Prosecutor, A.P. [1978] 2 SCR 371 : (1978) 1 SCC 240; 
State  v. Captain Jagjit Singh [1962] 3 SCR 622 : AIR 1962 
SC 253; Hari v. State of U.P. [2021] 10 SCR 1022 : (2021) 17 
4
Supreme Court Reports
SCC 111; Munilakshmi v. Narendra Babu [2023] 14 SCR 1058 : 
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1380; NHRC v. State of Gujarat [2009] 
7 SCR 236 : (2009) 6 SCC 767; P v. State of M.P. [2022] 3 
SCR 823 : (2022) 15 SCC 211; Dolat Ram v. State of Haryana 
[1994] Supp. 6 SCR 69 : (1995) 1 SCC 349; State through Delhi 
Administration v. Sanjay Gandhi [1978] 3 SCR 950 : (1978) 2 
SCC 411; Raghubir Singh v. State of Bihar [1986] 3 SCR 802 : 
(1986) 4 SCC 481 – referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
14th Report of the Law Commission of India, “Reform of Judicial 
Administration”, 1958; 154th Report of the Law Commission, 
“Code of Criminal Procedure”, 1996; Malimath Committee Report, 
“Reforms of Criminal Justice System”, 2003; 198th Report of 
the Law Commission in 2006, “Witness Identity Protection and 
Witness Protection Programmes”; 4th Report of the National Police 
Commission, 1980 – referred to.
List of Acts
Witness Protection Scheme, 2018; Criminal Procedure Code, 1973; 
Penal Code, 1860; Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
List of Keywords
Witness Protection Scheme, 2018; Witness Protection Scheme not 
an alternative to CrPC for cancellation of bail; Cancellation of bail; 
Threats to the witnesses; Violation of conditions of bail; Breach of 
the conditions of the bail; Denying the cancellation of bail; Abusing 
the liberty; Declined to cancel the bail; Fear; Intimidation; Threat; 
Tampering with the evidence; Witness Protection Scheme; Remedial 
measure; Curative measure; Bail cancellation; Conditions for the 
grant or cancellation of bail; Witnesses turning hostile; Protection to 
witnesses of heinous crimes and crimes against women; Remedy 
under the Witness Protection Scheme.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
3830 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 11.04.2025 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in CRMBCA No. 93 of 2025
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
5
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Rishi Malhotra, Sr. Adv., Ms. Ansuiya, Shivaansh Maini, Vansh 
Vij, Prem Malhotra.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Dr. Vijendra Singh, Aniket Tiwari, Nitin Saluja, Akshay Dev, Anurag 
Singh, Satya Kam Sharma.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal arises from the order passed by the High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad dated 11.04.2025 in Criminal Miscellaneous 
Bail Cancellation Application No.93 of 2025 (for short, the “Impugned 
Order”), by which the application filed by the appellant herein-the 
original complainant seeking to get the bail of the accused persons 
cancelled on the ground that they are administering threats to the 
witnesses came to be finally disposed of with some directions.
3.	
The Impugned Order being very short, we quote it as under: -
“1. The instant Criminal Misc. Bail Cancellation Application 
has been filed for cancellation of bail of accused/Opposite 
Party No.2 on behalf of complainant/First Informer in C.Cr.
No. 137 of 2022 under Section 34, 302, 201, 120B, 34 IPC, 
Police Station - Surajpur, District - Gautam Budh Nagar.
2. Heard learned counsel of complainant/First Informer 
and learned Government Counsel and perused file.
3. It is the averment of learned counsel of complainant/first 
informer that bail has been granted to accused/Opposite 
Party No.2 on conditions mentioned in the bail order, but 
accused/Opposite Party No.2 has violated the conditions 
mentioned in the bail order. The complainant and his 
witnesses are being threatened by him. An application 
has also been filed by the First Informant before Police/
Administrative officers in this regard.
6
Supreme Court Reports
4. It is the averment of learned Additional Government 
Counsel that the complainant/first informer has this remedy/
opportunity under the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 
and this application for cancellation of bail can be disposed 
of in the light of protection provided to the first informer/
witnesses under the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 
instead of filing application for cancellation of bail.
5. Keeping in view the contentions of the learned Additional 
Government Counsel, it is the opinion of this court that 
because the complainant/First Informer has right to get 
protection under the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018, 
which has been allowed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in 
Mahender Chawla and others Vs. Union of India reported 
in (2019) 14 SCC 615.
6. Accordingly, this application for cancellation of bail is 
finally disposed of with liberty that if the complainant/first 
informant files an application in prescribed form under 
Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 before the competent 
authority for the redressal of his grievances along with 
the certified copy of this order, then the application of the 
complainant/first informer will be heard immediately within 
a week by the competent authority and a legal decision 
will be taken thereon at the earliest/as early as possible 
within one month.
7. Accordingly, this application for cancellation of bail is 
finally disposed of.”
4.	
It appears from the materials on record that the appellant herein-the 
original first informant, lodged the FIR bearing No.137 of 2022 with 
the Surajpur Police Station District Gautam Budh Nagar, U.P. for the 
offence punishable under Sections 302, 201, 364, 120-B read with 
34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “the I.P.C.”).
5.	
The accused persons were arrested and thereafter were ordered 
to be released on bail by the High Court, subject to certain terms 
and conditions.
6.	
We take notice of the order passed by the High Court dated 29.04.2024 
by which the High Court granted bail to the respondent no. 2 herein-
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
7
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
the original accused. While ordering the release of the respondent 
no. 2 on bail, the High Court imposed the following conditions: - 
“1. The accused will not tamper with the prosecution 
evidence during the course of investigation and trial.
2. The applicant will not threaten/ intimidate the prosecution 
witnesses and victim / complainant.
3. The applicant will follow the orders of the court. He will 
be present in the court on the date fixed for hearing and 
will not take adjournment unnecessarily and will co-operate 
the trial honestly.
4. The applicant will not misuse the liberty of bail after 
being released on bail and will not take part in any criminal 
activity nor will commit any offence.
5. The applicant will not lure or threaten any person or 
police officers familiar with the facts of the case directly or 
indirectly nor will make any promise to them due to which 
they have to refrain from revealing the facts in the court.
In violation of any of the above conditions in the case, the 
trial court is at liberty to dismiss the bail of the applicant 
as per rules.”
(Emphasis supplied)
7.	
It is the case of the appellant herein that thereafter, the respondent 
no.2 started administering threats to the witnesses.
8.	
We are also informed that two First Information Reports bearing nos. 
262 of 2024 and 740 of 2024, respectively came to be lodged at the 
Surajpur Police Station, District Gautum Budh Nagar by the witness 
namely Chahat Ram to whom threats were being administered by 
the accused i.e. the respondent no. 2 herein.
9.	
In such circumstances, referred to above, the appellant went before 
the High Court with an application under Section 439 (2) of the 
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for short the “Cr.P.C.”) seeking 
cancellation of bail on the ground that the accused had violated the 
conditions imposed at the time of his release on bail.
10.	 We take notice of the fact that the High Court has passed a very 
curious order.
8
Supreme Court Reports
11.	 The High Court says that the remedy with the appellant as an 
aggrieved person being the original first informant is under the Witness 
Protection Scheme, 2018.	
In other words, what we have been 
able to understand from the bare reading of the impugned order 
is that the High Court wants the appellant to avail the provisions 
of the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 (for short, the “Witness 
Protection Scheme”). Having said so, the High Court declined to 
cancel the bail.
12.	 In such circumstances, referred to above, the appellant is here before 
this Court with the present appeal.
13.	 We heard Mr.Rishi Malhotra, the learned senior counsel appearing 
for the appellant, Mr. Vijendra Singh the learned counsel appearing 
for the State and Mr.Nitin Saluja, the learned counsel appearing for 
the respondent no. 2; the original accused.
14.	 The learned counsel appearing for the respondent no. 2 would 
submit that when the impugned order came to be passed by the 
High Court, his client was not before the High Court as no notice 
was issued to him.
15.	 On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the State, 
upon instructions from the Investigating Officer, who is personally 
present in the Court today submitted that the I.O. has found some 
substance in the allegations levelled by the appellant as regards the 
administration of threats to the witnesses by the respondent no. 2.
16.	 We are of the view that the High Court should have decided the 
application seeking cancellation of bail on its own merits by applying 
the well settled Principles of law.
17.	 We take notice of the fact that the High Court while ordering release 
of the respondent no. 2 on bail, had itself observed that in the event 
of violation or breach of any of the conditions, the trial court would 
be at liberty to cancel the bail of the accused.
18.	 When it is an outright case of breach of the conditions of the bail order 
and when the original first informant is able to prima facie demonstrate 
in what manner the accused person is abusing the liberty granted 
to him, then, in such circumstances, the provisions of the Witness 
Protection Scheme, 2018 have hardly any role to play. This Scheme 
has nothing to do as such when the complainant seeks cancellation 
of bail on the ground of threats being administered to the witnesses.
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
9
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
SALUTARY OBJECT OF WITNESS PROTECTION SCHEME, 2018
19.	 We take this opportunity to explain the true scope and purport of the 
Witness Protection Scheme more particularly to make it clear that 
it is not an alternative to the provisions of the erstwhile CrPC and 
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita (BNSS), 2023 in so far as 
cancellation of bail is concerned.
Legislative History
20.	 The concept that witnesses of a crime should be accorded protection 
is not novel, rather it has been a brewing byproduct of years of 
deliberation, and a widely accepted facet, considered to be essential 
to the fair functioning of any criminal machinery.
21.	 In Zahira Habibullah Sheikh v. State of Gujarat reported in 
(2004) 4 SCC 158 it was observed that “if the witness himself is 
incapacitated from acting as eyes and ears of justice, the trial gets 
putrefied and paralysed, and it no longer can constitute a fair trial.” 
Without protection and support, witnesses cannot discharge their 
solemn role, and criminal justice loses both its purpose and legitimacy.
22.	 Criminal justice rests upon the testimony of witnesses. It is they 
who bring before the court the truth of the events, the identity of 
the offender, and the sequence of acts which constitute the offence. 
The quality of justice depends to a large extent on the testimony 
of witnesses and unless witnesses are able to depose freely, the 
entire process would be reduced to futility. Without the testimony 
of witnesses, justice cannot be done. Delay, harassment, and 
intimidation cause a collapse of faith in criminal justice.
23.	 Yet, the plight of witnesses has long been a matter of serious concern. 
Over a period of years, it has been seen that witnesses are being 
harassed and threatened a great deal and many a time there is no 
adequate arrangements by the State for reassuring their confidence 
to speak the truth freely. 
24.	 The need for a comprehensive framework for protection of witness 
had been echoed as early as 1958, more particularly in the 14th 
Report of the Law Commission of India, titled “Reform of Judicial 
Administration”, wherein it took note of the concerning trend of 
harassment and intimidation of witness over the years. It expressed its 
anguish over a increasing pattern of witnesses turning hostile under 
10
Supreme Court Reports
duress and intimidation that was resulting in a complete collapse of 
prosecutions in cases of grave and heinous offences.
25.	 Decades later, in 1996, the 154th Report of the Law Commission on 
the Code of Criminal Procedure lamented that, although “witnesses 
are the most important factor in the criminal justice system” yet, there 
exists no law “for protecting them from harassment or threats”. It 
stressed that “unless the witnesses are protected, it would be difficult 
to expect them to come forward and depose truthfully.”
26.	 A witness who is unable to depose freely is a liability, not an asset, 
to the system. A criminal justice system that cannot protect its 
witnesses cannot protect its citizens. A fair trial is not only the right 
of the accused but also of the victim and of society. The right to a 
fair trial is meaningless if the witnesses cannot come forward to 
depose without fear.
27.	 The Malimath Committee Report on Reforms of Criminal Justice 
System in 2003 expressed its concerns over how witnesses were 
being threatened and lured, particularly by accused persons enlarged 
on bail, which had the domino effect of many of them turning hostile. 
It observed that protection of witnesses, is the duty of the State for 
without them, there can be no justice.
28.	 Several other reports of the Law Commission and other committees, 
time and again reiterated the growing need for a comprehensive 
framework on witness protection, and made a slew of recommendations 
for protecting witnesses not only from external threats but also from 
re-victimisation within the courtroom. 
29.	 The 198th Report of the Law Commission in 2006, titled “Witness 
Identity Protection and Witness Protection Programmes”, earmarked 
a watershed moment that emphatically asserted the pressing need 
for witness protection to enable them to depose without fear and to 
ensure that trials continue remain fair and not a farce. It recommended 
a comprehensive cohort of measures for eradicating or neutralizing 
the effects of threats, intimidation and harassment that have entered 
the minds of the witnesses (emphasis).
30.	 It was against this backdrop of reports, committee recommendations, 
and catena of decisions of this Court, that the Ministry of Home Affairs, 
formulated the draft Witness Protection Scheme, 2018. However, 
the scheme assumed the force of law, only after the decision in the 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
11
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
case of Mahender Chawla v. Union of India, reported in (2019) 
14 SCC 615, wherein this Court whilst recognizing that the Right 
to Fair Trial encompassed within its ambit the right of witnesses to 
depose fearlessly and without intimidation, exercised its powers 
under Article 142 to declare the draft Witness Protection Scheme 
as operative and binding.
The Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 is Curative in Nature 
31.	 The reason for us to exhaustively discuss the legislative history, and 
the longstanding push by the various committees over a significant 
period of years for a witness protection scheme is to lay emphasis 
that, the promulgation of the Witness Protection Scheme, was not 
conceived as an alternative or substitute for the existing considerations 
or conditions for the grant or cancellation of bail, already enshrined 
in Section(s) 437 and 439 of the Cr.P.C., respectively.
32.	 The principle that individual liberty of accused and undertrial can 
be curtailed to ensure that his conduct does not interfere with the 
course of criminal justice existed even before the first report of the 
Law Commission in 1958, that emphatically urged the pressing need 
for formulation of a witness protection scheme. Rather, as already 
discussed in the aforesaid, this push for a witness protection scheme 
gained momentum due to the alarming increase in the instances of 
witnesses turning hostile on account of threats, intimidation, and 
harassment, despite the sweeping provisions on cancellation of bail, 
if an accused person attempts to contact any of the witness. 
33.	 In this regard, few observations of some of the committees is 
instructive. The 4th Report of the National Police Commission, as 
far back as 1980, had noted that the “existing provisions regarding 
cancellation of bail are wholly insufficient to reassure witnesses 
who face social and economic pressures beyond the courtroom.” 
On similar lines, the Malimath Committee observed that despite bail 
cancellations and penal provisions, “witnesses turn hostile because 
the system does not provide them the protective shield necessary to 
resist intimidation.” The Law Commission in its 154th Report remarked 
that “the menace of intimidation has assumed dimensions far beyond 
the reach of provisions relating to bail and cancellation”.
34.	 The aforesaid observations underscore that a dedicated scheme 
on witness protection was a result of the imperative need to 
12
Supreme Court Reports
secure testimony, due to the psychological complexities of witness 
vulnerability, that the law on bail could not by itself address. If the 
witnesses are not able to depose freely, justice itself will be a casualty.
35.	 In Zahira Habibullah Sheikh (supra) this Court succinctly explained 
that while courts may cancel bail or issue directions restraining the 
accused, “the majesty of the law is eroded if witnesses are not 
protected and are driven to silence by intimidation.” The emphasis 
was not merely on the formal power of the court to act against the 
accused, but on the lived reality of the witness who must continue to 
reside in the shadow of fear. Cancellation of bail could not remove 
that fear; only protection could. 
36.	 The true purpose of the Witness Protection Scheme is to eradicate 
the corrosive effect that intimidation and threats, whether overt or 
covert, have upon the witness’s ability to speak the truth fearlessly. 
It is to address the insidious psychological impact on the minds 
of witnesses and eliminate the climate of fear, that may cloud the 
testimony of the witnesses during trial.
37.	 There is a fine but pertinent distinction between the grant of bail and 
its cancellation on the ground of violation of the conditions of bail 
order and the affording of protection to a witness under the Scheme.
38.	 The Witness Protection Scheme is a remedial and curative measure, 
designed to neutralise the effects of threats once they have 
materialised. Bail cancellation, on the other hand, is a preventive and 
supervisory function of the criminal court, whose very duty it is to 
ensure that the trial proceeds unpolluted by intimidation. The former 
is a positive obligation of the State, whereas the latter is judicial in 
nature, flowing from the inherent power of the courts to ensure that 
justice is done under its watch. 
39.	 The existence of a Witness Protection Scheme can by no stretch 
be a consideration to decline to cancel the bail, even when there is 
prima-facie material indicating that the accused administered threats 
or caused intimidation to the witnesses. To substitute one for the other 
is to denude the court of its authority and render the provisions of bail 
cancellation otiose and thereby make a mockery of the conditions 
imposed while granting bail. As then there could be no meaningful 
reason for imposition of conditions for grant of bail, if its violation, 
that has the potency to pollute the streams of justice is simpliciter 
brushed aside on the pretext of some form of alternative remedy.
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
13
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
40.	 Bail is not to be understood merely as a mechanical order releasing 
a person from custody; it is, in substance, a judicial recognition that 
liberty is the norm and detention an exception, subject however to 
the overriding imperative that liberty should not be abused to thwart 
the course of justice. This Court in Gudikanti Narasimhulu v. Public 
Prosecutor, A.P. reported in (1978) 1 SCC 240 and a catena of 
other decisions has emphasised that the discretion of granting bail 
is guided by considerations of likelihood of abscondence, tampering 
of evidence, and intimidation of witnesses. 
41.	 When bail is granted, it is not an untrammelled licence to act as one 
pleases. The conditions imposed under Section(s) 437 sub-section 
(3) or 439 sub-section (2) of the Cr.P.C. are not mere ad-libs, they 
constitute substantive obligations upon the accused as-well as the 
courts granting the bail. The grant of bail is not a mere release but a 
conditional liberty. Before enlarging the accused on bail, the court is 
required to impose such conditions as necessary to meet the ends of 
justice and ensure a fair trial. Even after the release of the accused 
person, the court retains the duty of supervision to revoke bail upon 
breach of the conditions on which the accused was released. 
42.	 Violation of those conditions is a ground for cancellation of bail as 
a matter of duty enjoined upon the court who whilst enlarging the 
infracting accused on bail, allowed such violation to ensue under 
its watch. 
43.	 As held in State v. Captain Jagjit Singh reported in AIR 1962 SC 
253 the considerations relevant for bail are not only with reference 
to the accused but also with reference to the larger interests of the 
public and the State.
44.	 The courts cannot abdicate its role on the pretext that since the State 
has a scheme for protecting witnesses, we shall not exercise our 
jurisdiction to cancel bail even though conditions have been violated. 
45.	 The Witness Protection Scheme is applicable to offences which are 
punishable with death or life imprisonment or an imprisonment up to 
seven years and above and also offences punishable under Section(s) 
354, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D and 509 of the I.P.C., respectively. 
The protection granted by the Scheme is limited, it does not address 
concerns of persons who are witness to offences other than the 
aforesaid. Whereas the net effect of cancellation of bail, when the 
accused person so released, violated any of the conditions imposed 
14
Supreme Court Reports
therein is two folds; first, it is a preventive and corrective measure 
aimed at ensuring that such infractions which have the propensity to 
seriously undermine a particular prosecution, is adequately prevented 
from happening again in the near future, by nipping in the bud, the 
root cause of such actions, and secondly, it is a measure that the 
courts are empowered to undertake, in view of the peculiar facts of 
each case and the attending circumstances, and is not confined to 
any particular threshold of offences or nature of witnesses, etc., it 
is the general sweeping powers of the court as the sentinel on qui 
vive and the custodian of the sword of justice. 
46.	 The scope of the Scheme reflects its objective, that a witness to 
an offence must be able to depose before the court without fear or 
intimidation. At the same time, it acknowledges that the decision to 
extend protection is inherently subjective, to be taken upon a careful 
assessment of the vulnerability of the witness and the seriousness 
of the threat perception (emphasis). The same reads as under: -
“Scope of the Scheme:
Witness Protection may be as simple as providing a 
police escort to the witness up to the Courtroom or using 
modern communication technology (such as audio video 
means) for recording of testimony. In other more complex 
cases, involving organised criminal group, extraordinary 
measures are required to ensure the witness’s safety viz. 
anonymity, offering temporary residence in a safe house, 
giving a new identity, and relocation of the witness at an 
undisclosed place. However, Witness protection needs of 
a witness may have to be viewed on case to case basis 
depending upon their vulnerability and threat perception.”
(Emphasis supplied)
47.	 From a bare perusal of the Scheme, it is evidence that the 
considerations for when the recourse to the Scheme may be taken by 
any witness is not contingent upon violation of a condition imposed on 
an accused during grant of bail or even during its pendency. This Court 
has time and again cautioned that due to the non-implementation of 
the scheme, many witnesses succumb to hostility. 
48.	 In Hari v. State of U.P. reported in (2021) 17 SCC 111, this Court 
lamented that had the Witness Protection Scheme been implemented 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
15
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
when the witnesses were deposing evidence in the said case, they 
would not have turned hostile. What needs to be noted here is that 
the scheme is merely for the protection of the witness, and it casts 
a positive obligation on the State machinery to ensure that a fair trial 
takes place. But to outrightly treat it as a ground to deny cancellation 
of bail is entirely erroneous. 
49.	 In Munilakshmi v. Narendra Babu reported in 2023 SCC OnLine 
SC 1380, this Court cancelled the bail of the respondent as the 
principal witnesses to the trial turned hostile while the respondent 
was on bail. This Court noted that a vital witness had made a “sudden 
summersault” in her stance and the same cannot be detached from 
the allegations made against the respondent of hiring goons, etc. 
This Court noted that when glaring and overwhelming circumstances 
come under the notice of the court which reflect upon the misuse 
of concession of bail, it becomes an imperative upon the court to 
cancel the bail. This Court concluded that the respondent had the 
potential to influence the witnesses slated to depose against him. 
This Court also noted that in such situations the remedies in law 
for courts are either to cancel the bail so tendered or to recall such 
witness. In the following paragraphs, reproduced below this Court 
explained the importance of witnesses during prosecution and the 
factors which lead to their hostility: -
“26. A major challenge before this Court is to ensure a 
fair trial amidst the hostility of witnesses. Undoubtedly, 
witnesses play a very vital role in bringing justice home, 
especially in the adversarial system of court trials where 
the onus lies on the prosecution to prove the guilt of the 
accused by bringing persons acquainted with the facts 
before the courts of justice. Their testimony determines 
the fate of a trial before the court of law, without which the 
court would be like a sailor in an ocean sans the radar 
and the compass.[Mohd. Ashraf, ‘Peculiarities of Indian 
Criminal Justice System Towards Witnesses : An Analysis’ 
(2018) 26 ALJ 64.] If a witness turns hostile for extenuating 
reasons and is reluctant to depose the unvarnished truth, 
it will cause irreversible damage to the administration of 
justice and the faith of the society at large in the efficacy 
and credibility of the criminal justice system will stand 
eroded and shattered.
16
Supreme Court Reports
27. This Court in Ramesh v. State of Haryana [(2017) 1 
SCC 529] has illustratively explained the reasons behind 
the witnesses retracting their statements before the Court 
and turning hostile. These include : (i) threat/intimidation; 
(ii) inducement by various means; (iii) use of muscle and 
money power by the accused; (iv) use of stock witnesses; 
(v) protracted trials; (vi) hassles faced by the witnesses 
during investigation and trial; and (vii) nonexistence of a 
robust legislative mechanism to check hostility of witnesses. 
Amongst these reasons, the ‘threat’ and ‘intimidation’ of the 
witnesses have always been a matter of serious concern 
amongst all the stakeholders.”
50.	 What we want to convey is that the scheme is not an answer for 
every form of threat or intimidation that a witness is subjected to. In 
fact, if we are to go by the bare provisions of the scheme the real 
quotient of danger that an accused is capable of exhibiting does not 
even figure out. There is nothing in the entire scheme that is aimed at 
preventing the accused person or anyone else, as the case may be, 
from going around administering threats or causing intimidation to the 
witnesses. If we are to comment on the scheme, it offers protection 
to witnesses of heinous crimes and crimes against women, which, 
with all humility, is a very myopic view to societal realities, in our 
view. More importantly, a straitjacket formula to witness protection 
is neither possible nor endeavoured. In NHRC v. State of Gujarat 
reported in (2009) 6 SCC 767, this Court pointed out that it would 
not be proper to give any general directions for witness protection, 
as the facts of each case would require unique measures to assure 
that the witnesses’ right to testify safely is secured. 
51.	 While the scheme creates an executive mechanism in pursuance of 
which the relevant authorities make the requisite measures for the 
protection of the witnesses, in no way does the obligations of the 
courts of law stand delegated. The standards applied in a case of 
seeking witness protection and cancellation of bail will be entirely 
on different levels. To ask a witness, on whose presence the fine 
thread of a fair trial rests, to run from pillar to post is grossly unjust. 
52.	 Thus, the purpose of the Scheme is to ensure that witnesses, who 
are the eyes and ears of justice, are not reduced to silence or 
falsehood by threats that invade their psyche. It does not displace or 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
17
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
dilute the established jurisprudence of bail; rather, it works alongside 
it, providing a protective canopy so that the existing provisions can 
operate in an environment where witnesses are free to testify. This 
duality is essential, as the law on bail restrains the accused through 
conditions, and prevents any further infractions of intimidation by 
cancellation of bail while the Witness Protection Scheme eradicate 
the invisible yet potent influence of fear, intimidation or threat, that 
are the consequences of the threats made by the accused persons 
to maintain the sanctity of trial. 
53.	 Fair Trial requires earnest initiative, on the part of both the State that 
represents the collective conscience of society against crimes, and 
the courts acting as sentinel on the qui vive to secure that truth is not 
suppressed, nor justice subverted, by any external interference. It is 
in this light that the Witness Protection Scheme must be understood 
in the context of provisions on grant or cancellation of bail
Principles governing Cancellation of Bail
54.	 The law on cancellation of bail is well settled through a plethora of 
decisions of this Court. 
55.	 In P v. State of M.P. reported in (2022) 15 SCC 211 this Court held 
that the grant of bail is always conditional and may be subject to 
cancellation, if after the grant of the same there is any supervening 
circumstances that impedes fair trial.
“23. In a recent decision of a three-Judge Bench of this 
Court in Imran v. Mohd. Bhava [Imran v. Mohd. Bhava, 
(2022) 13 SCC 70] it has been held as follows: 
“20. Indeed, it is a well-established principle 
that once bail has been granted it would require 
overwhelming circumstances for its cancellation. 
However, this Court in its judgment in Vipan 
Kumar Dhir v. State of Punjab [Vipan Kumar 
Dhir v. State of Punjab, (2021) 15 SCC 518] 
has also reiterated, that while conventionally, 
certain supervening circumstances impeding 
fair trial must develop after granting bail to 
an accused, for its cancellation by a superior 
court, bail, can also be revoked by a superior 
18
Supreme Court Reports
court, when the previous court granting bail has 
ignored relevant material available on record, 
gravity of the offence or its societal impact. It 
was thus observed : 
‘9. … Conventionally, there can be 
supervening circumstances which may 
develop post the grant of bail and are non-
conducive to fair trial, making it necessary 
to cancel the bail. This Court in Dolat 
Ram v. State of Haryana [Dolat Ram v. 
State of Haryana, (1995) 1 SCC 349 : 1995 
SCC (Cri) 237] observed that: 
“4. Rejection of bail in a non-bailable 
case at the initial stage and the 
cancellation of bail so granted, have 
to be considered and dealt with on 
different basis. Very cogent and 
overwhelming circumstances are 
necessary for an order directing 
the cancellation of the bail, already 
granted. Generally speaking, the 
grounds for cancellation of bail, broadly 
(illustrative and not exhaustive) are : 
interference or attempt to interfere 
with the due course of administration 
of justice or evasion or attempt to 
evade the due course of justice or 
abuse of the concession granted 
to the accused in any manner. The 
satisfaction of the court, on the basis 
of material placed on the record of the 
possibility of the accused absconding 
is yet another reason justifying the 
cancellation of bail. However, bail 
once granted should not be cancelled 
in a mechanical manner without 
considering whether any supervening 
circumstances have rendered it no 
longer conducive to a fair trial to allow 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
19
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
the accused to retain his freedom by 
enjoying the concession of bail during 
the trial.”
10. These principles have been reiterated 
time and again, more recently by a three-
Judge Bench of this Court in X v. State of 
Telangana [X v. State of Telangana, (2018) 
16 SCC 511 : (2020) 1 SCC (Cri) 902].
11. In addition to the caveat illustrated 
in the cited decision(s), bail can also be 
revoked where the court has considered 
irrelevant factors or has ignored relevant 
material available on record which renders 
the order granting bail legally untenable. 
The gravity of the offence, conduct of the 
accused and societal impact of an undue 
indulgence by Court when the investigation 
is at the threshold, are also amongst a few 
situations, where a Superior Court can 
interfere in an order of bail to prevent the 
miscarriage of justice and to bolster the 
administration of criminal justice system…’
xxx
xxx
xxx
23. Thus, while considering cancellation of bail already 
granted by a lower court, would indeed require 
significant scrutiny at the instance of superior court, 
however, bail when granted can always be revoked if 
the relevant material on record, gravity of the offence 
or its societal impact have not been considered by 
the lower court. In such instances, where bail is 
granted in a mechanical manner, the order granting 
bail is liable to be set aside. Moreover, the decisions 
cited hereinabove, enumerate certain basic principles 
which must be borne in mind when deciding upon an 
application for grant of bail. Thus, while each case 
has its own unique factual matrix, which assumes a 
significant role in determination of bail matters, grant 
20
Supreme Court Reports
of bail must also be exercised by having regard to 
the abovementioned well-settled principles.”
24. As can be discerned from the above decisions, for 
cancelling bail once granted, the court must consider 
whether any supervening circumstances have arisen or 
the conduct of the accused post grant of bail demonstrates 
that it is no longer conducive to a fair trial to permit him 
to retain his freedom by enjoying the concession of bail 
during trial [Dolat Ram v. State of Haryana, (1995) 1 SCC 
349 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 237] . To put it differently, in ordinary 
circumstances, this Court would be loathe to interfere with 
an order passed by the court below granting bail but if such 
an order is found to be illegal or perverse or premised on 
material that is irrelevant, then such an order is susceptible 
to scrutiny and interference by the appellate court.”
(Emphasis supplied)
56.	 This Court then summed up the principles or circumstance governing 
the cancellation of bail as under: -
“25. Some of the circumstances where bail granted to the 
accused under Section 439(1)CrPC can be cancelled are 
enumerated below:
(a) If he misuses his liberty by indulging in similar/other 
criminal activity;
(b) If he interferes with the course of investigation;
(c) If he attempts to tamper with the evidence;
(d) If he attempts to influence/threaten the witnesses;
(e) If he evades or attempts to evade court proceedings;
(f) If he indulges in activities which would hamper smooth 
investigation;
(g) If he is likely to flee from the country;
(h) If he attempts to make himself scarce by going 
underground and/or becoming unavailable to the 
investigating agency;
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
21
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
(i) If he attempts to place himself beyond the reach of 
his surety.
(j) If any facts may emerge after the grant of bail which 
are considered unconducive to a fair trial.
We may clarify that the aforesaid list is only illustrative in 
nature and not exhaustive.”
(Emphasis supplied)
57.	 The governing principle is that if the accused tampers with evidence, 
threatens witnesses, or attempts to subvert the trial, the indulgence 
of bail is to be withdrawn. It is a recognition that liberty is conditional, 
not absolute, and subject always to the larger interest of ensuring 
a fair trial. Considerations for cancellation of bail must always be 
on the basis of the well settled principles as discussed aforesaid. 
There cannot be any extraneous considerations involved that are 
unknown to the law of bails.
58.	 At the same time, emphasis has to be laid that cancellation of bail 
occupies a distinct space in the criminal justice machinery. Cancellation 
intervenes at the stage of violation, to prevent recurrence. In State 
through Delhi Administration v. Sanjay Gandhi reported in (1978) 
2 SCC 411, this Court underscored that tampering with witnesses 
constitutes a cogent ground for cancellation, for the “opportunity 
of being on bail cannot be permitted to be abused for the purpose 
of thwarting the course of justice.” Similarly, in Raghubir Singh v. 
State of Bihar reported in (1986) 4 SCC 481, it was reiterated that 
intimidation of witnesses is sufficient to revoke the liberty granted. 
It must be guided by the lodestar of preventing interference with 
witnesses that “strikes at the root of the rule of law.”
59.	 Thus, the considerations that must weigh with the court for setting 
aside the bail order on an application being moved by the aggrieved 
party include any supervening circumstances that might have 
occurred after granting relief to the accused, the conduct of the 
accused while on bail, any attempt on the part of the accused to 
procrastinate, resulting in delaying the trial, any instance of threats 
being extended to the witnesses while on bail, any attempt on the 
part of the accused to tamper with the evidence in any manner 
etc. 
22
Supreme Court Reports
The Practice prevailing in the Allahabad High Court 
60.	 Before, we close this matter, we must address ourselves on one 
very important aspect that has come to our notice. We have come 
across a catena of orders from the Allahabad High Court proceeding 
on an incorrect assumption of the law, more particularly that the 
Witness Protection Scheme is a substitute for cancellation of bail. 
According to the High Court it is an alternative remedy. We are at 
pains to note that we came across at least forty recent orders, that 
have been passed in the last one year alone, as per the records 
available from the official website of the Allahabad High Court, 
which are as under: -
S. 
No.
Details of the Case
Date of 
Order
1.
Shaym Manohar v. State of U.P.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 26/2024
29.08.2025
2.
Amar Nath v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 612/2024
28.08.2025
3.
Dharmendra Kumar Kesarwani v. State of U.P. & Anr. 
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 478/2024
01.08.2025
4.
Ram Narayan Pandey v. State of U.P.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 101/2024
14.07.2025
5.
Saumya Singh v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 163/2024
10.07.2025
6.
Meena Devi v. State of U.P.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 387/2024
09.05.2025
7.
Qadir Husain v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 134/2024
07.07.2025
8.
Pankaj Dubey v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 71/2025
07.07.2025
9.
Shiv Ganesh v. State of U.P. & Ors.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 37/2024
03.07.2025
10.
Arun Kumar Singh v. State of U.P.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 55/2024
02.07.2025
11.
Ashish Kumar Aggarwal v. State of U.P. & Ors.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 99/2024
01.07.2025
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
23
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
12.
Ashif v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 237/2024
08.05.2025
13.
Rajesh Makan v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 113/2024
08.05.2025
14.
Bakelal v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 125/2024
07.05.2024
15.
Sri Krishna v. State of U.P. & Anr. 
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 83/2025
01.05.2025
16.
Dharmendra Kumar Kesarwani v. State of U.P.& Ors.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 306/2024
30.04.2025
17.
Priya Rana v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 588/2024
30.04.2025
18.
Ram Milan v. State of U.P. & Ors.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 133/2024
30.04.2025
19.
Smt. Reena Yadav v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 100/2024
30.04.2025
20.
Saumya Singh v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 561/2024
25.04.2025
21.
Archarya Mahant Vivek Das v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 598/2024
23.04.2025
22.
Dhanmani Devi v. State of U.P. & Ors.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 135/2025
22.04.2025
23.
Shyam Manohar v. State of U.P. & Ors.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 26/2024
29.08.2025
24.
Aleem v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 185/2025
28.08.2025
25.
Sadar Mohd Khan v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 214/2024
01.08.2025
26.
Ikbal Jahan v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 437/2024
08.05.2025
27.
Maina Devi v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 184/2024
01.08.2025
28.
Smt. Rajmati Devi v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 32/2024
03.07.2025
24
Supreme Court Reports
29.
Arvind Singh v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 579/2024
09.05.2025
30.
Smt. Pooja Sharma v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 424/2024
08.05.2025
31.
Nagendra Singh Yadav v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 76/2025
21.04.2025
32.
Mishri Lal Nishad v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 155/2025
23.04.2025
33.
Shivom Sharma v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 167/2024
30.04.2025
34.
Shivpujan Pandey v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 587/2024
30.04.2025
35.
Sikander Patel v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 500/2024
02.05.2025
36.
Nankoo Bind v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 167/2025
01.05.2025
37.
Gulshnover v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 171/2024
15.07.2025
38.
Mubarak Husain v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 158/2025
25.04.2025
39.
Shiv Singh v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 10/2025
24.04.2025
40.
Raju v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Crl. Misc. Bail Cancellation Application No. 103/2025
21.04.2025
61.	 All of the above orders are a verbatim copy of each other. We are 
dismayed to note that the aforesaid practice of passing cyclostyled 
template orders has been in vogue past more than two years. The 
most disturbing feature of all these orders passed is that the Public 
Prosecutor instead of assisting the learned Judge in the right direction 
by pointing out the correct position of law, has instead himself urged 
that the witness or complainant be relegated to avail remedy under 
the Witness Protection Scheme rather than seeking cancellation of 
the bail of the accused person, who administered threats and caused 
intimidation to the witness, in violation of the conditions of his bail 
order. We deprecate this practice. 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
25
Phireram v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
62.	 In such circumstances, referred to above, we set aside the impugned 
order passed by the High Court and remand the matter to the High 
Court with a direction to rehear the application for cancellation of 
bail on its own merits, after calling for an appropriate report from 
the Investigating Officer as regards the two FIRs which have been 
registered by Chahat Ram i.e. one of the witnesses in the said case.
63.	 After giving an opportunity of hearing to all the Parties concerned 
and looking into the report that the High Court may call for from the 
I.O., the High Court shall proceed thereafter to pass an appropriate 
order in accordance with law.
64.	 Let the entire exercise as aforesaid be undertaken at the earliest, 
and an appropriate order be passed within a period of four weeks 
from today.
65.	 With the aforesaid, this appeal stands disposed of.
66.	 Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
67.	 The Registry is directed to circulate one copy each of this order to 
all the High Courts. The Registry is further directed to forthwith send 
a copy of this order to the Hon’ble Chief Justice of the Allahabad 
High Court. 
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey