[2025] 8 S.C.R. 599 : 2025 INSC 936
Shail Kumari 
v. 
State of Chhattisgarh
(Criminal Appeal No. 2189 of 2017)
06 August 2025
[B.R. Gavai,* CJI and K. Vinod Chandran, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the conviction, as recorded by the trial Court and affirmed 
by the High Court was totally based on conjectures and surmises; 
whether the conviction of the appellant u/s.302 IPC is sustainable 
in law.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – s.302 – Allegation against the  
appellant-accused that she took her children to a pond/lake 
and drowned them – Trial Court convicted accused u/s.302 of 
IPC solely on the basis of evidence of PW-2 – The High Court 
upheld the conviction – Correctness:
Held: The conviction in the present case could be sustainable only if 
the prosecution is in a position to prove the case beyond reasonable 
doubt and also establish a chain of events which is so connected 
to each other that it leads to no other conclusion than the guilt of 
the accused – The conviction is based solely on the evidence of 
PW-2 – The perusal of the cross-examination of PW-2 would reveal 
that he has fully improved his case in his examination-in-chief – He 
has narrated what does not find place in his statement u/s.161, 
CrPC – As such his evidence is totally contradictory and therefore 
totally unworthy – Apart from the testimony of PW-2, there is nothing 
to connect the present appellant with the crime in question – The 
prosecution has not even examined the Rickshaw Puller who was 
stated to have seen the appellant going towards the Pujari Talab 
and the children floating in the lake – The testimony of PW-2 being 
unreliable, at the most, can be treated as hearsay evidence – This 
Court is of the considered opinion that the conviction, as recorded 
by the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court is totally based 
on conjectures and surmises – The conviction of the appellant is 
not sustainable in law. [Paras 7, 8, 12, 13, 14]
* Author
600
Supreme Court Reports
Evidence – Law on conviction in the case of circumstantial 
evidence – Discussed. [Paras 6 and 7]
Case Law Cited
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra [1985] 1 SCR 
88 : (1984) 4 SCC 116; Vadivelu Thevar v. State of Madras [1957] 
1 SCR 981 : 1957 SCC OnLine SC 13 – relied on.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Circumstantial evidence; Chain of events; Improving  
examination-in-chief; Conviction on the basis of circumstantial 
evidence; Conjectures and surmises; Murder.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
2189 of 2017
From the Judgment and Order dated 08.09.2010 of the High Court 
of Chhatisgarh at Bilaspur in CRLA No. 713 of 2004
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Mrs. Nanita Sharma.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Prashant Singh, Mrs. Prerna Dhall, Ambuj Swaroop, Shivam 
Ganeshiya, Kapil Katare, Ms. Rajnandani Kumari.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
B.R. Gavai, CJI.
FACTUAL ASPECT
1.	
The present appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 
8th September 2010, passed by a Division Bench of the High Court 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
601
Shail Kumari v. State of Chhattisgarh
of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur (hereinafter referred to as “the High 
Court”) in Criminal Appeal No. 713 of 2004, wherein the Division 
Bench dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant herein - Shail 
Kumari. By the said judgment and order, the High Court upheld 
the judgment and order dated 18th June 2004 rendered by the 
2nd Additional Sessions Judge, Durg (hereinafter referred to as “the 
Trial Court”) in Sessions Trial No. 286 of 2003 convicting the appellant 
for the offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as “IPC”) and sentencing her to 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.
2.	
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeal are as under:
2.1	 The case of the prosecution is that on 11th October 2003, one 
Santosh Kumar Pandey (PW-2), who was an owner of Beetel 
Kiosk shop, saw the appellant with her two children (son aged – 2 
years and daughter aged – 4 months) going towards Pujari 
Talab (a water body situated near the Beetel Kiosk shop of 
PW-2). He observed that the appellant was taking the kids 
in a disordered condition and grew suspicious. He asked a 
nearby Rickshaw Puller to go and see where the appellant 
was going. After five to seven minutes, the Rickshaw Puller 
came back and stated that two children were floating in the 
water body. Thereafter, PW-2 saw the appellant going towards 
the railway tracks. PW-2 then sat on a motorbike driven 
by someone else coming from the other side of the water 
body and he asked the rider to turn around and go towards 
the train tracks. PW-2 then saw a train coming towards the 
appellant but somehow, he managed to drag her away from 
the train tracks.
2.2	 On being asked by PW-2 the reason for killing her children, the 
appellant replied that she had been fighting with her husband. 
PW-2 informed the Police about the incident and the Dehati 
merg intimation was lodged which was signed by PW-2. Then 
the First Information Report was lodged.
2.3	 The dead bodies of the victims were sent for post-mortem. The 
post-mortem was conducted by Dr. P. Akhtar (PW-6) and the 
cause of death for both of the victims was found to be asphyxia 
due to drowning.
602
Supreme Court Reports
2.4	 The statements of the witnesses were recorded under Section 
161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter 
referred to as “Cr.P.C”). After completion of the investigation, 
Charge Sheet was filed against the appellant before the Court 
of Judicial Magistrate First Class, Durg, who then, committed 
the case to the trial court.
2.5	 Nine witnesses were examined during the trial and the 
appellant was examined under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. 
The appellant, in her statement, denied the circumstances 
appearing against her. She further stated that she had been 
in a state of tension, because her husband - Kanhaiya Lal 
Kharre had performed a second marriage. She lastly stated 
that she was innocent and that she had been falsely implicated 
in the case.
2.6	 At the conclusion of the trial, the Trial Court vide its judgment 
and order dated 18th June 2004 convicted the present appellant 
for the offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC. On 
the same day, in a separate hearing, the Trial Court sentenced 
the appellant to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.
2.7	 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appellant preferred a 
criminal appeal before the High Court challenging the judgment 
and order of conviction and sentence awarded by the Trial 
Court. The High Court vide the impugned judgment and order 
dismissed the appeal and affirmed the conviction and sentence 
awarded by the Trial Court.
2.8	 Being aggrieved thereby, a Special Leave Petition was filed 
before this Court on 21st July 2017. This Court, vide Order dated 
15th December 2017 condoned the delay and granted leave in 
the matter. The appellant was also directed to be released on 
interim bail on the conditions which may be imposed by the 
Trial Court.
SUBMISSIONS
3.	
We have heard Smt. Nanita Sharma, learned counsel appearing on 
behalf of the appellant and Shri Prashant Singh, learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the respondent - State.
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
603
Shail Kumari v. State of Chhattisgarh
4.	
Smt. Nanita Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the appellant 
submitted that the present case is a case of no evidence. The High 
Court, only on the basis of conjectures and surmises, has convicted 
the appellant. It is, therefore, submitted that the present appeal 
deserves to be allowed and the appellant be acquitted of the charges. 
5.	
Per contra, Shri Prashant Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf 
of the respondent would submit that no perversity could be noticed 
in the concurrent findings of facts, so as to warrant interference of 
this Court. It is submitted that both the Courts below, upon correct 
appreciation of evidence, have found that it is the appellant alone who 
is responsible for committing the crime in question. It is, therefore, 
submitted that the appeal is liable to be dismissed. 
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 
6.	
Indisputably, the present case rests on circumstantial evidence. The 
law on conviction in the case of circumstantial evidence has been 
very well crystallized by this Court in the case of Sharad Birdhichand 
Sarda v. State of Maharashtra1. It will be relevant to refer to the 
observations made by this Court in the aforesaid case: 
“151. It is well settled that the prosecution must stand 
or fall on its own legs and it cannot derive any strength 
from the weakness of the defence. This is trite law and 
no decision has taken a contrary view. What some cases 
have held is only this: where various links in a chain are in 
themselves complete, then a false plea or a false defence 
may be called into aid only to lend assurance to the court. 
In other words, before using the additional link it must be 
proved that all the links in the chain are complete and do 
not suffer from any infirmity. It is not the law that where 
there is any infirmity or lacuna in the prosecution case, 
the same could be cured or supplied by a false defence 
or a plea which is not accepted by a court.
152. Before discussing the cases relied upon by the 
High Court we would like to cite a few decisions on the 
1	
(1984) 4 SCC 116 
604
Supreme Court Reports
nature, character and essential proof required in a criminal 
case which rests on circumstantial evidence alone. The 
most fundamental and basic decision of this Court is  
Hanumant v. State of Madhya Pradesh [(1952) 2 SCC 71 : 
AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1952 SCR 1091 : 1953 Cri LJ 129]. 
This case has been uniformly followed and applied by this 
Court in a large number of later decisions up-to-date, for 
instance, the cases of Tufail (Alias) Simmi v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh [(1969) 3 SCC 198 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 55] and 
Ramgopal v. State of Maharashtra [(1972) 4 SCC 625 : AIR 
1972 SC 656] . It may be useful to extract what Mahajan, 
J. has laid down in Hanumant case [(1952) 2 SCC 71 : 
AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1952 SCR 1091 : 1953 Cri LJ 129] :
“It is well to remember that in cases where 
the evidence is of a circumstantial nature, the 
circumstances from which the conclusion of 
guilt is to be drawn should in the first instance 
be fully established, and all the facts so 
established should be consistent only with the 
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. Again, 
the circumstances should be of a conclusive 
nature and tendency and they should be such 
as to exclude every hypothesis but the one 
proposed to be proved. In other words, there 
must be a chain of evidence so far complete 
as not to leave any reasonable ground for a 
conclusion consistent with the innocence of the 
accused and it must be such as to show that 
within all human probability the act must have 
been done by the accused.”
153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the 
following conditions must be fulfilled before a case against 
an accused can be said to be fully established:
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion 
of guilt is to be drawn should be fully established.
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the 
circumstances concerned “must or should” and not “may 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
605
Shail Kumari v. State of Chhattisgarh
be” established. There is not only a grammatical but a 
legal distinction between “may be proved” and “must be 
or should be proved” as was held by this Court in Shivaji 
Sahabrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 
793 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 1033 : 1973 Crl LJ 1783] where 
the observations were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807: SCC 
(Cri) p. 1047]
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that the 
accused must be and not merely may be guilty 
before a court can convict and the mental 
distance between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is 
long and divides vague conjectures from sure 
conclusions.”
(2) the facts so established should be consistent 
only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the 
accused, that is to say, they should not be 
explainable on any other hypothesis except that 
the accused is guilty,
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive 
nature and tendency,
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis 
except the one to be proved, and
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so 
complete as not to leave any reasonable ground 
for the conclusion consistent with the innocence 
of the accused and must show that in all human 
probability the act must have been done by the 
accused.
154. These five golden principles, if we may say so, 
constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case based 
on circumstantial evidence.”
7.	
The law laid down in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda (supra) has been 
consistently followed by this Court in a catena of judgments. In 
that view of the matter, the conviction in the present case could be 
sustainable only if the prosecution is in a position to prove the case 
beyond reasonable doubt and also establish a chain of events which 
606
Supreme Court Reports
is so connected to each other that it leads to no other conclusion 
than the guilt of the accused.
8.	
The perusal of both the impugned judgments and orders passed by 
the High Court as well as the Trial Court would reveal that though the 
prosecution has examined nine witnesses, the conviction is based 
solely on the evidence of PW-2.
9.	
The perusal of the testimony of PW-2 would reveal that on the 
day of the incident, after opening his shop, he went to urinate, and 
while returning from there, he saw that accused was abnormally 
going towards the Pujari Talab, she was keeping one child in her 
hands and another child was walking with her. He stated that Pujari 
Talab is situated at a distance of 10 feet away from his shop. He 
stated that in the meantime, he directed a nearby Rickshaw Puller 
to watch where she was going. He further stated that after one and 
half hour, the appellant was going alone behind an STD nearby. 
Rickshaw Puller told him that woman was going empty handed. He 
asked the Rickshaw Puller where the child was. He said that he 
didn’t know, she took them to pond. He then asked the Rickshaw 
Puller to go to the pond. After 5-7 minutes, he returned and told 
him that both the children were floating in the water. Later on, he 
stated that he saw that the accused was going to lie on the railway 
track. One Hero Honda motorbike was coming from the other side 
of the pond. He asked the rider to turn around and he went to the 
railway track. By the time train had come near, he dragged the 
accused away from railway track by holding her waist. He stated 
that he then brought her to his STD and asked her as to why she 
killed her children to which she replied that she had a fight with 
her husband.
10.	 From the cross-examination of this witness, it would reveal that his 
statement in the examination-in-chief is a complete improvement 
than what was stated by him in his police statement. Whatever he 
narrated before the Court does not find place in his police statement. 
11.	 This Court in the case of Vadivelu Thevar v. State of Madras2 
held thus: 
2	
AIR 1957 SC 614 : 1957 SCC OnLine SC 13
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
607
Shail Kumari v. State of Chhattisgarh
“11. In view of these considerations, we have no hesitation 
in holding that the contention that in a murder case, the 
court should insist upon plurality of witnesses, is much too 
broadly stated. Section 134 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
has categorically laid it down that “no particular number 
of witnesses shall, in any case, be required for the proof 
of any fact”. The legislature determined, as long ago as 
1872, presumably after due consideration of the pros and 
cons, that it shall not be necessary for proof or disproof 
of a fact, to call any particular number of witnesses. In 
England, both before and after the passing of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872, there have been a number of statutes 
as set out in Sarkar’s Law of Evidence — 9th Edn., at pp. 
1100 and 1101, forbidding convictions on the testimony of 
a single witness. The Indian Legislature has not insisted 
on laying down any such exceptions to the general rule 
recognized in Section 134 quoted above. The section 
enshrines the well recognized maxim that “Evidence has 
to be weighed and not counted”. Our Legislature has given 
statutory recognition to the fact that administration of justice 
may be hampered if a particular number of witnesses 
were to be insisted upon. It is not seldom that a crime 
has been committed in the presence of only one witness, 
leaving aside those cases which are not of uncommon 
occurrence, where determination of guilt depends entirely 
on circumstantial evidence. If the legislature were to insist 
upon plurality of witnesses, cases where the testimony of 
a single witness only could be available in proof of the 
crime, would go unpunished. It is here that the discretion 
of the presiding judge comes into play. The matter thus 
must depend upon the circumstances of each case and 
the quality of the evidence of the single witness whose 
testimony has to be either accepted or rejected. If such a 
testimony is found by the court to be entirely reliable, there 
is no legal impediment to the conviction of the accused 
person on such proof. Even as the guilt of an accused 
person may be proved by the testimony of a single witness, 
the innocence of an accused person may be established 
on the testimony of a single witness, even though a 
608
Supreme Court Reports
considerable number of witnesses may be forthcoming to 
testify to the truth of the case for the prosecution. Hence, 
in our opinion, it is a sound and well-established rule 
of law that the court is concerned with the quality and 
not with the quantity of the evidence necessary for 
proving or disproving a fact. Generally speaking, oral 
testimony in this context may be classified into three 
categories, namely:
(1) Wholly reliable.
(2) Wholly unreliable.
(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.
12. In the first category of proof, the court should 
have no difficulty in coming to its conclusion either 
way — it may convict or may acquit on the testimony 
of a single witness, if it is found to be above reproach 
or suspicion of interestedness, incompetence or 
subornation. In the second category, the court equally 
has no difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is 
in the third category of cases, that the court has to 
be circumspect and has to look for corroboration in 
material particulars by reliable testimony, direct or 
circumstantial. There is another danger in insisting on 
plurality of witnesses. Irrespective of the quality of the 
oral evidence of a single witness, if courts were to insist 
on plurality of witnesses in proof of any fact, they will be 
indirectly encouraging subornation of witnesses. Situations 
may arise and do arise where only a single person is 
available to give evidence in support of a disputed fact. 
The court naturally has to weigh carefully such a testimony 
and if it is satisfied that the evidence is reliable and free 
from all taints which tend to render oral testimony open to 
suspicion, it becomes its duty to act upon such testimony. 
The law reports contain many precedents where the court 
had to depend and act upon the testimony of a single 
witness in support of the prosecution. There are exceptions 
to this rule, for example, in cases of sexual offences or 
of the testimony of an approver; both these are cases in 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
609
Shail Kumari v. State of Chhattisgarh
which the oral testimony is, by its very nature, suspect, 
being that of a participator in crime. But, where there 
are no such exceptional reasons operating, it becomes 
the duty of the court to convict, if it is satisfied that the 
testimony of a single witness is entirely reliable. We have 
therefore, no reasons to refuse to act upon the testimony 
of the first witness, which is the only reliable evidence in 
support of the prosecution.”
(emphasis supplied)
12.	 This Court in Vadivelu Thevar (supra) has classified the witnesses 
into three types: (i) wholly reliable, (ii) wholly unreliable, and (iii) 
neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable. It has been held that in 
the first category of cases, there is no difficulty inasmuch as if the 
testimony of such witness is found to be fully reliable, it may convict 
or may acquit on the basis of his statement. Even in the second 
category cases, there is no difficulty that if evidence of such a witness 
is found to be wholly unreliable, the testimony must be discarded. 
The difficulty arises only in the case of third type of witnesses, where 
the Court is required to separate the chaff from grain to arrive at 
a conclusion. The perusal of the cross-examination of PW-2 would 
reveal that he has fully improved his case in his examination-in-chief. 
He has narrated what does not find place in his statement under 
Section 161, Cr.P.C. As such, his evidence is totally contradictory 
and therefore totally unworthy.
13.	 Apart from the testimony of PW-2, there is nothing to connect the 
present appellant with the crime in question. The prosecution has 
not even examined the Rickshaw Puller who was stated to have 
seen the appellant going towards the Pujari Talab and the children 
floating in the lake. The testimony of PW-2 being unreliable, at the 
most, can be treated as hearsay evidence. 
14.	 In that view of the matter, we are of the considered opinion that the 
conviction, as recorded by the Trial Court and affirmed by the High 
Court is totally based on conjectures and surmises. We are of the 
considered view that the conviction of the appellant is not sustainable 
in law at all. 
15.	 In the result, we pass the following order:
610
Supreme Court Reports
i.	
The present appeal is allowed;
ii.	
The impugned judgment and order dated 8th September 2010, 
passed by the High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 713 of 2004 
and the judgment and order dated 18th June 2004 passed by 
the Trial Court in Sessions Trial No. 286 of 2003 are hereby 
quashed and set aside; and
iii.	
The appellant is acquitted of all the charges levelled against 
her and is directed to be released forthwith, if her detention is 
not required in any other case. 
16.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan