[2025] 10 S.C.R. 44 : 2025 INSC 1089
Geeta 
v. 
The State of Karnataka
(Criminal Appeal No. 1044 of 2018)
09 September 2025
[B.V. Nagarathna and K.V. Viswanathan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the conviction of the appellant u/s.306, IPC is sustainable; 
was the evidence against the appellant of such nature that the 
overt acts attributed to her left the deceased-victim with no option 
except to commit suicide.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – s.306 – Abetment of suicide – Ingredients 
of s.306, when not attracted – Deceased-victim and the first 
accused-appellant were immediate neighbours however, they 
were not on cordial terms and used to be at loggerheads – 
Case of the prosecution that victim took tuition classes in 
her house and that there used to be persistent noise coming 
from the house of the appellant and she repeatedly told the 
appellant to ensure that there was no noise as it disturbed 
her tuition – Victim had alleged that the appellant abused 
her by calling her a bitch and said that though she was 25 
years of age, she was not married and hurled caste abuses 
too – Victim committed suicide – High Court confirmed the 
appellant’s conviction u/s.306, IPC, as recorded by the Trial 
Court however, she was acquitted for offence punishable 
u/s.3(2)(v), SC/ST Act – Challenge to:
Held: 1.1 Appellant is not guilty of the offence u/s.306. [Para 24]
1.2 Neighbourhood quarrels are not unknown to societal living – 
They are as old as community living itself – Though there is 
evidence on record to show that over a period of few months the 
neighbours were at loggerheads – While the victim felt that her 
tuition classes were being disturbed, the appellant’s family have 
also had a grievance about the victim and her family scolding the 
children of the appellant’s household – Not only were there heated 
exchanges, but physical blows were also alleged to have been 
administered by the appellant’s party however, she was acquitted 
* Author
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
45
Geeta v. The State of Karnataka
for the offence punishable u/s.323 and even u/ss.504 and 506 – 
No appeal was preferred by the State. [Paras 15, 17]
1.3 The victim was a sensitive person and did not have any support 
in the fight against the first accused – As the first accused had 
support of her family, the victim felt miserable having felt that she lost 
the fight, which impulsively prompted her to take the extreme step 
of committing suicide, at the height of depressed mood. [Para 12]
1.4 Further, though the victim alleged that caste abuses were 
used, evidence was found lacking resulting in acquittal of all the 
five accused (the appellant and her four family members A2 to A5) 
on that score – The other four family members were acquitted of 
offence punishable u/s.306 also – Appellant herself was acquitted 
of offences like being a member of the unlawful assembly, rioting, 
causing hurt, criminal intimidation, and intentional insult with intent 
to provoke breach of the peace – Those acquittals have attained 
finality – Acquittal for offence under the SC/ST Act has also attained 
finality. [Paras 13]
1.5 Furthermore, in order to bring out an offence u/s.306 IPC 
specific abetment as contemplated by s.107, IPC on the part of the 
accused with an intention to bring about the suicide of the person 
concerned as a result of that abetment is required – The intention 
of the accused to aid or to instigate or to abet the deceased to 
commit suicide is a must for attracting s.306 – The harassment 
meted out to the victim should have left the victim with no other 
alternative but to put an end to his/her life. [Paras 19, 20]
1.6 When the appellant’s family and the victim’s family had heated 
exchanges, there was no intention to abet or to cause any member 
of either family to take their own life – These quarrels occur in 
everyday life, and on facts, there was no instigation on the part 
of the appellant to such an extent that the victim was left with no 
other option but to commit suicide – Appellant acquitted of the 
charge u/s.306 – Impugned judgment set aside. [Paras 23, 24]
Case Law Cited
Swamy Prahaladdas v. State of M.P. and Another (1995) Supp. 
3 SCC 438; Madan Mohan Singh v. State of Gujarat and Another 
[2010] 10 SCR 351 : (2010) 8 SCC 628; Amalendu Pal alias 
Jhantu v. State of West Bengal [2009] 15 SCR 836 : (2010) 1 
SCC 707; M. Mohan v. State [2011] 3 SCR 437 : (2011) 3 SCC 
626; Ramesh Kumar v. State of Chhattisgarh [2001] Supp. 4 
46
Supreme Court Reports
SCR 247 : (2001) 9 SCC 618; Mahendra Awase v. The State of 
Madhya Pradesh, 2025 INSC 76 : [2025] 2 SCR 80 – relied on.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
List of Keywords
Section 306, IPC; Abetment of suicide; Not guilty of the offence 
under Section 306, IPC; Neighbourhood quarrels; Neighbours not 
on cordial terms; Neighbours always at loggerheads; Caste abuses 
alleged; Dorr; Die you bitch; Victim was a sensitive person; Acquittal 
for offence under the SC/ST Act; Abetment as contemplated by 
s.107, IPC; No intention of the accused to aid or to instigate or 
to abet the deceased to commit suicide; Harassment; Overt acts; 
Victim left with no other option but to commit suicide; Victim left 
with no other alternative but to put an end to his/her life; No option 
except to commit suicide.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1044 of 2018
From the Judgment and Order dated 27.04.2018 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Kalaburagi in CRA No. 3658 of 2011
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Ms. Supreeta Sharanagouda, Sharanagouda Patil, Jyotish Pandey, 
Yash S Tiwari.
Adv. for the Respondent:
D. L. Chidananda.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.	
The present appeal challenges the judgment of the High Court 
of Karnataka, Kalaburagi Bench, Kalaburagi dated 27.04.2018 in 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
47
Geeta v. The State of Karnataka
Criminal Appeal No.3658 of 2011. By the said judgment, the appellant’s 
conviction under Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code (for short the 
“IPC”), as recorded by the Trial Court, was confirmed. However, the 
appellant was acquitted of the offence under Section 3(2)(v) of the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) 
Act, 1989 (for short the “SC/ST Act”). Insofar as the sentence imposed 
for offence under Section 306 IPC was concerned, the High Court 
thought it fit to modify the sentence of five years, as imposed by the 
Trial Court, to that of three years imprisonment. However, the fine 
of Rs. 5000/-, as imposed by the Trial Court, was maintained, with 
a default sentence of six months for non-payment of fine.
2.	
The Trial Court had convicted the appellant for offence under Section 
306 IPC as well as for offence under Section 3(2)(v) of the SC/ST 
Act. While the sentence of five years imprisonment was imposed 
for offence under Section 306, life imprisonment had been imposed 
along with a fine of Rs. 5,000/- for offence punishable under Section 
3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act.
3.	
We have heard Mr. Sharanagouda Patil, learned counsel for the 
appellant and Mr. D. L. Chidananda, learned counsel for the State. 
We have perused the records, including the Trial Court records.
4.	
The present matter pertains to an unfortunate incident that happened 
on 12.08.2008 when the deceased-Sarika, daughter of Peeraji 
Narayankar, set herself on fire around 10:00 p.m. in the night. She 
was taken to the Government Hospital, Bijapur for treatment. At 
the hospital, the deceased gave a statement before PW-16, Police 
Inspector Nagarjuna, which was exhibited as Ex. P-8. PW-16 – 
Nagarjuna, deposed that he received MLC from Bijapur District 
Hospital stating that a person by name Sarika was admitted to the 
hospital with burn injuries. After getting confirmation from the doctor 
about fitness of Sarika to give statement, he recorded the statement 
and obtained her thumb impression. PW-19 – Dr. Dileepa Ganjihala 
corroborated the statement to the effect that Sarika was conscious 
and was in a position to answer the questions. She had suffered 
about 58% burn injuries. Similarly, PW-20 – Dr. Shivanagowda Patil, 
also deposed that, on 13.08.2008, when PSI requested through a 
letter to give opinion as to whether Sarika was in a position to give 
a statement or not, he made an endorsement on the office copy 
that the injured was in a fit condition to give statement. The letter 
and the endorsement were marked as Ex. P-21 and Ex. P-21(a).
48
Supreme Court Reports
5.	
The statement marked as Ex. P-8, which formed the basis for the 
complaint and F.I.R., reads as under:
“My place is Vijaypur and I stay in above mentioned 
address. Geeta W/o. Raju Imdikar, they are staying in 
our Colony since 6 years, and since 6 months they have 
shifted to the house situated in front of my house which 
belongs to one Mahadev Pol.
I have completed I.T.I and now studying in B.A III year. I 
take tuition classes to small children in my home. At the 
rented house of Geeta W/o Raju Indikar which is situated 
in front of our home, there used to come some other boys 
and make noise which troubled me as a result I told to 
Geeta Indikar Not to make noise as it disturbs me, for 
that she used to abuse me by saying “you bitch, what 
you advise me it’s my house we do anything whatever we 
feel like” and “ this dorr bitch is not married even after 25 
years of age”. Like that she used to harass me when she 
saw me she used to hurt me talking to me indecently. My 
father Peeraji and my mother Renuka have advised Geeta 
Indikar many times but still Geeta has abused me and 
insulted since 6 months as a result I was very much hurt.
On last Sunday dated: 10.08.2008 when I was watching 
TV with my brother Sanket in my home at the time Geeta 
Indikar came there and scolded me and my brother by 
saying “why did you scold our boy Rahul @ Vinayak what 
that little kid has done” with her sister 1. Mala 2. Meena 
3. Suhasini they have also come and abused me in filthy 
language like bitch etc. On that day my brother and my 
parents had advised them and stoped the fight for which 
I didn’t say anything.
Yesterday on 12.08.2008 at about 8 in the evening myself 
and my brother Sanket and my mother Renuka were 
present in front of home 1. Geeta W/o. Raju Indikar 2) 
Raju Indikar 3) Mala D/o. Narayan Sindagi 4) Meena D/o. 
Narayan Sindagi 5) Suhasini D/o. Narayan Sindagi, these 
five members came and stood in front of our home and 
abused me by saying “you Dorr bitch you are not married 
yet and you argue with us” and also gave life threat all 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
49
Geeta v. The State of Karnataka
together assaulted my mother and me with hands and 
insulted and abused by saying “die you bitch” and all, that 
hurt me mentally so yesterday on 12.08.2008 at about 
10 O’clock in the night I took 5 liter can of oil from our 
kitchen and poured it on myself and ignited myself with 
the matchstick. When it started burn when my clothes 
were burnt and I started screaming at that time my mother 
Renuka and Pulabai w/o Yallappa, Sherkhan bibi from our 
colony came and extinguished the fire, by time my brother, 
my mother and Pulabai took me in an auto rickshaw to the 
Govt. Hospital Vijapur and admitted me for treatment, my 
face, chest, stomach, hands and legs, knees and thighs 
were burnt and the skin had peeled off.
The above mentioned 5 accused since 6 months have 
fought with me and abused me and insulted me by saying 
“this Dorr bitch is not married even after 25 years of age” 
and yesterday on 12.08.2008, 5 of them came to our home 
and assaulted me and my mother with their hands in front 
of my house as result I was mentally troubled, I myself 
poured kerosene oil and ignited fire on myself and tried to 
commit suicide in our kitchen and this complaint is against 
the above mentioned 5 persons and yesterday I suffered 
a lot but now I am feeling better. This I am stating before 
you to write it down.”
6.	
It can be seen that the complainant had stated that she was taking 
tuition classes for small children in her house; that there was 
persistent noise coming from the house of the appellant and that 
she had repeatedly told the appellant to ensure that there was no 
noise as it disturbed her tuition. The deceased had stated that the 
appellant abused by calling her a bitch and telling her that they will 
do whatever they feel like. The appellant is alleged to have further 
stated that the deceased, though 25 years of age, was not married. 
Two days before the incident, on 10.08.2008, the deceased stated 
that when she was watching TV with her brother Sanket at home, 
the appellant came and scolded both of them by saying “why did 
you scold our boy Rahul @ Vinayak what that little kid has done”. 
According to the deceased, the appellant came with her sisters 
Mala, Meena and Suhasini and abused her by calling her a bitch. 
50
Supreme Court Reports
She stated that her brother and parents advised them, stopped the 
fight and she did not say anything. According to the deceased, on 
12.08.2008, at about 8 pm in the evening when she and her brother-
Sanket, and mother-Renuka, were present, Geeta W/o Raju Indikar, 
Raju Indikar, Mala D/o Narayan Sindagi, Meena D/o Narayan Sindagi 
and Suhasini D/o Narayan Sindagi came and stood in front of her 
house and abused her by saying “you Dorr bitch you are not married 
yet and you argue with us” and also gave life threat and assaulted 
her mother and herself with hands and insulted and abused by 
saying “die you bitch”. According to the deceased, all this hurt her 
mentally so she on 12.08.2008 at about 10 O’clock in the night took 
five litres can of oil from her kitchen and poured it on herself and 
ignited herself with a matchstick. She stated that her mother, Pulabai 
and Sherkhan Bibi extinguished the fire, and her brother, mother 
and Pulabai took her in autorickshaw to the Government Hospital. 
The deceased succumbed to her injuries on 02.09.2008 i.e., about 
three weeks after the incident. 
7.	
The Investigating Officer filed chargesheet against all the five 
accused, namely,
1.	
Geeta W/o Raju Indikar – the appellant;
2.	
Raju S/o Sidram Indikar – since acquitted;
3.	
Mala D/o Narayan Sindagi – since acquitted;
4.	
Meena W/o Lokesh Agasar – since acquitted;
5.	
Suhasini D/o Narayan Sindagi – since acquitted;
for offences punishable under Sections 143, 147, 323, 504, 506 and 
306 read with Section 149 IPC and Section 3(1)(xi) of the SC/ST Act. 
At the trial, after framing of charges, prosecution examined twenty 
witnesses and marked documents as Ex. P-1 to P-25 and Material 
Objects as MO-1 to MO-3. The statements of the accused were 
recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
8.	
The Trial Court, after appreciating the evidence, held that the evidence 
does not reveal any specific overt act of accused Nos.3 to 5 insofar 
as the incident dated 10.08.2008 was concerned. It further found that 
no overt act of accused Nos.2 to 5 was noted insofar as the incident 
of 12.08.2008 was concerned in the complaint Ext.P-8. The Trial 
Court found the statement to be omnibus and in general and did not 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
51
Geeta v. The State of Karnataka
reveal that accused Nos. 2 to 5 have been actively assisting accused 
No. 1 Geeta (appellant) in irritating or annoying the deceased by 
words, deed and did not indicate that they had intention to provoke 
the deceased to commit suicide. The Trial Court found that there 
was no cogent evidence to establish that accused Nos. 2 to 5 were 
involved in the offence.
9.	
However, the Trial Court found that the statement Ex.P-8 read with 
the oral testimony of PWs-5, 6, 8, 9,10 and PW-16 lend credence 
to the prosecution theory that accused No.1 – appellant herein, 
has been irritating or annoying the deceased by words and deed 
to make the deceased to react. It was also found that the appellant 
had intention to provoke, incite, urge or encourage the deceased 
to commit suicide. The Trial Court also found that accused No.1, 
in view of the abuses attributed to the deceased was also liable 
for punishment under Section 3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act. In the end 
analysis, the Trial Court acquitted A2 to A5 of all the offences.
10.	 Accused No.1 – appellant was acquitted of the offences punishable 
under Sections 143 (punishment for being a member of unlawful 
assembly), 147 (punishment for rioting), 323 (punishment for 
voluntarily causing hurt), 504 (punishment for intentional insult with 
intent to provoke breach of the peace), 506 (punishment for criminal 
intimidation) read with Section 149 (prosecution of common object). 
However, the Trial Court convicted the appellant for the offence 
punishable under Section 3(2)(v) of SC/ST Act and Section 306 of 
IPC (abetment of suicide). Sentences, as indicated hereinabove, 
were imposed on the appellant. 
11.	 The appellant filed a Criminal Appeal before the High Court. The 
State accepted the Trial Court judgment insofar as the acquittals 
were concerned. The High Court acquitted the appellant for offence 
punishable under Section 3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act, as the material 
available on record was insufficient, and set aside the conviction and 
the sentence of life imprisonment. It will be noticed that the High 
Court recorded the following crucial finding:-
“11. After hearing the learned counsel for the appellant 
as well as the learned Additional State Public Prosecutor 
and when the judgment impugned is looked into; what is 
seen is that a minor fight between the victim and the first 
accused-appellant which has spread over for more than 
52
Supreme Court Reports
six months· prior to the incident has taken an ugly turn 
on the ill-fated day. The victim though an educated and 
accomplished women who was working as private teacher 
could not sustain constant harassment by the first accused 
in the form of fight has taken the extreme step to commit 
suicide. Assuming for a moment, if the accused has really 
taken the caste name to insult the victim, most of the 
neighbours who are witnesses on behalf of prosecution 
being members of the same community would have 
definitely stood by the victim while giving evidence. In fact, 
it is only one eyewitness who is neighbour examined as 
P.W.6 supported the case of prosecution as against the 
evidence of P.W.7, 11 and 15 who are three immediate 
neighbours of the victim have not supported the case of 
prosecution with reference to accusation made by first 
accused taking the name of the victim’s (sic).
12. Therefore, in this background what should be understood 
is that the victim is a sensitive person and …….., when 
she did not have any support in her fight against with 
the first accused; as against that first accused had the 
support of her family members who are accused Nos.2 
to 5 made her feel thoroughly miserable and having felt 
that she lost the fight, has impulsively promoted her to 
take the extreme step of committing suicide, which is at 
the height of the depressed mood which consequently 
resulted in her death. It is after the incident, the victim has 
stated in her complaint that she was ill-treated taking the 
name of her caste which is not supported oy most of her 
neighbours, except in all of them stating that the victim 
and first accused were being immediate neighbours were 
not in cordial terms and they always used to fight.
13. In this background, this Court find that the finding of 
the Court below in holding that the accusation against first 
accused is established so far as offence under Section 
306 of IPC, appears to be just and proper. However, when 
it comes to the offence alleged under Section 3 (2) (v) of 
SC/ST (PA) Act, 1989 is concerned, the material available 
on record is not sufficient. In spite of that, the Court below 
has committed serious error in convicting the first accused 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
53
Geeta v. The State of Karnataka
for the aforesaid offence and consequently imposing the 
punishment of life imprisonment to her, which does not 
stand to reason in the fact situation. Both from the point 
averments in the complaint and as well as the evidence 
available on record in support thereof”
12.	 From the judgment of the High Court, it is clear that: -
A.	
A minor fight between the victim and the appellant which had 
spread over six months took an ugly turn on the ill-fated day. 
The victim, though was an educated and accomplished woman 
who was working as a private teacher, could not sustain the 
constant harassment by the first accused and had taken the 
extreme step of committing suicide. Most of the neighbours 
have not supported the case of the prosecution with respect to 
the first accused taking the name of the victim’s caste.
B.	
It should be understood that the victim was a sensitive person 
and did not have any support in the fight against the first accused. 
As the first accused had support of her family, the victim felt 
miserable having felt that she lost the fight, which impulsively 
prompted her to take the extreme step of committing suicide, 
at the height of depressed mood consequently resulting in her 
death.
C.	
It is only after the incident, the victim has stated in her complaint 
that she was ill-treated by taking the name of her caste which 
is not supported by most of her neighbours, except that all of 
them stated that the victim and the first accused being immediate 
neighbours were not in cordial terms and always used to fight.
13.	 It is in this background that we have to analyse the evidence while 
appreciating the contention of the learned counsel for the parties. 
Though the victim alleged that caste abuses were used, evidence 
was found lacking resulting in acquittal of all the five accused on that 
score. The other four family members A2 to A5 have been acquitted 
of offence punishable under Section 306 also. The appellant herself 
has been acquitted of offences like being a member of the unlawful 
assembly, rioting, causing hurt, criminal intimidation, and intentional 
insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace. Those acquittals 
have attained finality. Acquittal for offence under the SC/ST Act has 
also attained finality.
54
Supreme Court Reports
14.	 We are only to examine whether, taking the prosecution case at 
its highest, conviction of the appellant under Section 306 could be 
sustained. Is the evidence against the appellant of such nature that 
the overt acts attributed to her left the victim with no option except to 
commit suicide? We think not and we say so for the following reasons.
15.	 Though ‘love thy neighbour’ is the ideal scenario, neighbourhood 
quarrels are not unknown to societal living. They are as old as 
community living itself. The question is whether on facts there has 
been a case of abetment of suicide? 
16.	 We have minutely scanned the evidence adduced by the prosecution. 
PW-5 Sanket, the brother of the deceased, testified broadly 
corroborating the version set out in the complaint. His narration 
about the events that transpired on 12.08.2008 are omnibus and 
general in nature. He also admits that they did not go to the Police 
Station to file a complaint. He even speaks of the fact that he was 
part of the group of persons who pacified the quarrel. PW-6 Phulabai 
was a neighbour cited as an eye-witness to the incident. On being 
asked in cross-examination that she had not mentioned in her 
statement about the appellant having assaulted the mother of the 
victim and catching her hair, she deposed to the effect that she did 
not remember. PW-8 Sathyavva@Sakkubai, was a neighbour, and 
PW-9 Renuka, the mother of the Victim has also deposed on behalf 
of the prosecution. Their evidence is on the same lines as that of 
the complaint lodged by the victim. 
17.	 For the purpose of examining whether the ingredients of Section 
306 are attracted, we take the prosecution case as it is. Taken at 
its highest, there is definitely evidence on record to show that over 
a period of few months the neighbours were at loggerheads. While 
the victim felt that her tuition classes were being disturbed, the 
appellant’s family have also had a grievance about the victim and 
her family scolding the children of the appellant’s household. There 
is no doubt that not only were there heated exchanges, but physical 
blows were also alleged to have been administered by the appellant’s 
party. Insofar as delivering of physical blows are concerned, today the 
appellant stands acquitted for the offence punishable under Section 
323. She stands acquitted even for the offences punishable under 
Section 504 and 506. The State has not preferred any appeal. 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
55
Geeta v. The State of Karnataka
18.	 Even if we were to assume that physical blows were administered, 
will that per se constitute abetment to suicide? This Court in a 
case where the accused told the deceased “go and die” and when 
thereafter, the deceased committed suicide, absolved the accused 
of the charge under Section 306 by holding as under:
“3. ...Those words are casual nature which are often 
employed in the heat of the moment between quarrelling 
people. Nothing serious is expected to follow thereafter. 
The said act does not reflect the requisite mens rea on 
the assumption that these words would be carried out in 
all events. ...”
[Swamy Prahaladdas Vs. State of M.P. and Another, 
(1995) Supp (3) SCC 438]
19.	 This Court in Madan Mohan Singh Vs. State of Gujarat and Another, 
(2010) 8 SCC 628, held that in order to bring out an offence under 
Section 306 IPC specific abetment as contemplated by Section 
107 IPC on the part of the accused with an intention to bring about 
the suicide of the person concerned as a result of that abetment is 
required. It was further held that the intention of the accused to aid 
or to instigate or to abet the deceased to commit suicide is a must 
for attracting Section 306.
20.	 In Amalendu Pal alias Jhantu Vs. State of West Bengal, (2010) 
1 SCC 707, this Court held that the harassment meted out to the 
victim should have left the victim with no other alternative but to put 
an end to his/her life. 
21.	 In M. Mohan Vs. State, (2011) 3 SCC 626, this Court followed the 
dictum in Ramesh Kumar Vs. State of Chhattisgarh, (2001) 9 SCC 
618, wherein it was held as under: 
“41. This Court in SCC para 20 of Ramesh Kumar has 
examined different shades of the meaning of “instigation”. 
Para 20 reads as under: (SCC p. 629)
“20. Instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke, 
incite or encourage to do ‘an act’. To satisfy 
the requirement of instigation though it is not 
necessary that actual words must be used to 
that effect or what constitutes instigation must 
56
Supreme Court Reports
necessarily and specifically be suggestive of 
the consequence. Yet a reasonable certainty 
to incite the consequence must be capable of 
being spelt out. The present one is not a case 
where the accused had by his acts or omission 
or by a continued course of conduct created 
such circumstances that the deceased was left 
with no other option except to commit suicide 
in which case an instigation may have been 
inferred. A word uttered in the fit of anger or 
emotion without intending the consequences to 
actually follow cannot be said to be instigation.”
In the said case this Court came to the conclusion that 
there is no evidence and material available on record 
wherefrom an inference of the appellant-accused having 
abetted commission of suicide by Seema (the appellant’s 
wife therein) may necessarily be drawn.”
Thereafter, this Court in Mohan (supra) held:-
45. The intention of the legislature and the ratio of the 
cases decided by this Court are clear that in order to 
convict a person under Section 306 IPC there has to be a 
clear mens rea to commit the offence. It also requires an 
active act or direct act which led the deceased to commit 
suicide seeing no option and this act must have been 
intended to push the deceased into such a position that 
he/she committed suicide.”
22.	 This Court in Mahendra Awase Vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh, 
2025 INSC 76, after analyzing the long line of precedents held as 
under: -
“18. As has been held hereinabove, to satisfy the 
requirement of instigation the accused by his act or 
omission or by a continued course of conduct should have 
created such circumstances that the deceased was left with 
no other option except to commit suicide. It was also held 
that a word uttered in a fit of anger and emotion without 
intending the consequences to actually follow cannot be 
said to be instigation.”
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
57
Geeta v. The State of Karnataka
23.	 Applying the tests laid down hereinabove, we are not able to persuade 
ourselves to hold that when the appellant’s family and the victim’s 
family had heated exchanges, there was any intention to abet or 
to cause any member of either family to take their own life. These 
quarrels occur in everyday life, and on facts we are not able to 
conclude that there was an instigation on the part of the appellant 
to such an extent that the victim was left with no other option but 
to commit suicide. 
24.	 In view of what has been held above, we find that the appellant is 
not guilty of the offence under Section 306. We acquit her of the 
charge under Section 306. The net result is that, the appeal stands 
allowed and impugned judgment of the High Court of Karnataka, 
Kalaburagi Bench, Kalaburagi dated 27.04.2018 in Criminal Appeal 
No.3658 of 2011 is set aside. The appellant is on bail. Her bail bonds 
stand discharged. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey