[2025] 5 S.C.R. 616 : 2025 INSC 484
Neha Chandrakant Shroff & Anr. 
v. 
The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 5098 of 2025)
08 April 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the order passed by the High Court, 
rejecting the writ petition filed by the appellants u/Article 226 of 
the Constitution praying for the possession of property given for 
temporary occupation to police officials in 1940.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Art.226 – Writ jurisdiction – Exercise 
of, when alternative remedy available – Writ petition by the 
appellant seeking for possession of their two flats which were 
permitted to be temporarily occupied by the police department 
at their request to meet the requirement of housing police 
officers in the year 1940 – High Court rejected the petition 
holding that it was not inclined to exercise jurisdiction  
u/Art.226 because there was no written order of requisition – 
Correctness:
Held: High Court should have readily exercised its writ jurisdiction – 
Constitutional powers vested in High Court or Supreme Court 
cannot be fettered by any alternative remedy available to the party 
concerned – Injustice, whenever and wherever it takes place, 
should be struck down as an anathema to the rule of law and the 
provisions of the Constitution – High Court was hesitant to exercise 
its writ jurisdiction as it got confused on the aspect of nature of 
possession – High Court found the possession to be permissive in 
nature and thought fit to relegate the appellants to avail alternative 
remedy of filing a suit – High Court should have kept in mind that 
the year was 1940 when the country was ruled by Britishers and 
was fighting hard to seek independence – At that time, department 
might have persuaded the appellants/predecessors in title to part 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
617
Neha Chandrakant Shroff & Anr. v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
with the possession of two flats for Police Department – However, 
it has been 84 years that the Police Department was in occupation 
and for past eighteen years even rent was not paid – If the 
appellants are asked to institute a suit would be like adding insult 
to the injury – Rule of exclusion of writ jurisdiction by availability 
of an alternative remedy is a rule of discretion and not one of 
compulsion – There can be many contingencies in which High 
Court may be justified in exercising its writ jurisdiction inspite of 
availability of an alternative remedy – Thus, the impugned judgment 
passed by the High Court set aside – Respondents to handover 
vacant and peaceful possession of both the flats to the appellants 
along with the arrears of rent. [Paras 6, 8-12]
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Right to Information Act, 2005; Maharashtra 
Land Requisition Act, 1948; Maharashtra Rent Control Act, 1999
List of Keywords
Writ Petition; Exclusion of writ jurisdiction; Permissive possession; 
Recovery of possession; Housing police officials; Temporary 
occupation; Order of requisition; Possession; Constitutional 
powers; Anathema to rule of law; Writ jurisdiction; Availability of 
alternative remedy; Police department; Requirement of housing 
police officers.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 5098 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 30.04.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in WP No. 2135 of 2009
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Azmat Hayat Amanullah, Ms. Aishwarya Kantawala, Ms. Rebecca 
Mishra.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Shekhar Naphade, Sr. Adv., Shreyas Lalit, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, 
Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, Bharat Bagla, Sourav Singh, Aditya 
Krishna, Adarsh Dubey. 
618
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal arises from the impugned judgment passed by the High 
Court of Judicature at Bombay dated 30th April, 2024 in Writ Petition 
No.2135 of 2009 by which the Writ Petition filed by the appellants 
herein against the State of Maharashtra and Others came to be 
rejected. The impugned judgment dated 30th April, 2024 reads thus:-
1. In this writ petition, filed under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India, the petitioners seek a declaration that 
the action on the part of the respondents in not releasing 
and thereafter restoring the possession of Flat Nos.11 and 
12 on the 3rd floor of the building named ‘Amar Bhavan’, 
A.R. Rangekar Marg, Opera House, Mumbai 400 007 that 
belong to the petitioners is unlawful, illegal and in violation 
of the petitioners’ fundamental rights. The petitioners 
accordingly pray that the respondents be directed to 
forthwith vacate and handover peaceful possession of the 
aforesaid premises to them.
2. It is the case of the petitioners, as pleaded in the writ 
petition, that in or about the year 1940, the aforesaid two 
flats were permitted to be temporarily occupied by the Police 
Department at their request so as to meet the requirement 
of housing police officers to enable maintenance of the 
law and order situation. The petitioners have pleaded 
that there was no written contract executed between their 
predecessor and the Police Department. Certain amounts 
were paid by the Police Department to the predecessor on 
monthly basis and till about 31st December 2007, Rs.611/- 
per month was being paid. On 10th September 1997, 
the predecessor of the petitioners, through his Advocate 
had issued a communication to the respondents raising 
a grievance with regard to non-payment of the monthly 
amount. According to the petitioners, since they were in 
need of the aforesaid premises, a request was made to 
the respondents to return possession of the same. Since 
the same was not done, this writ petition came to be filed.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
619
Neha Chandrakant Shroff & Anr. v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
3. Dr. Sujay Kantawala, learned counsel for the petitioners 
in support of the prayers made in the writ petition referred 
to the orders passed in Writ Petition Nos.1108 of 2005, 343 
of 2005 and 344 of 2005 to contend that in the aforesaid 
writ petitions, the possession of the respective premises 
were handed over by the respondents to the concerned 
petitioners. Though this writ petition was to be heard along 
with the aforesaid writ petitions, it could not be heard when 
the said writ petitions were decided. He submits that on 
similar terms, a direction be issued to the respondents to 
handover possession of the aforesaid two flats. Without 
prejudice to the aforesaid, it was contended that the 
occupation of the respondents since the year 1940 was on 
the backdrop that the two flats had been requisitioned by the 
respondents for temporary use of the Police Department. 
Though there was no written order requisitioning these 
two flats, it was undisputed that possession of the same 
was handed over to facilitate convenience of the Police 
Department since it intended to house it’s police officers. 
Inviting attention to the information supplied to the 
petitioners under the provisions of Right to Information 
Act, 2005 (for short, “the Act of 2005”) pursuant to the 
application dated 25th June 2007, it was pointed out that 
copy of written Lease Deed was not available even with the 
respondents. Further information supplied in October, 2020 
indicated that the respondents had no record to indicate 
the period when the monthly payment towards occupying 
these flats was paid. Since the petitioners were now in 
need of the said two flats, it was obligatory on the part of 
the respondents to handover possession of the same. As 
regards applicability of the provisions of the Maharashtra 
Land Requisition Act, 1948 (for short,“Act of 1948”), as 
urged by the respondents is concerned, it was submitted 
that since the two flats were orally requisitioned in the 
year 1940, the provisions of the said Act would not apply 
retrospectively. To substantiate this contention as regards 
the entitlement to receive back possession, the learned 
counsel for the petitioners placed reliance on the decisions 
of the Supreme Court in H.D. Vora Vs. State of Maharashtra 
and Ors. (1984) 2 SCC 337; Grahak Sanstha Manch and 
620
Supreme Court Reports
Ors. Vs. State of Maharashtra (1994) 4 SCC 192; Roy 
Estate Vs. State of Jharkhand and Ors. (2009) 12 SCC 194, 
as well as the judgment of this Court in Geeta Mangesh 
Laud and Ors. Vs. Appellate Authority and the Principal 
Secretary, General Administration Department and Ors., 
with connected writ petitions, 2023 SCC OnLine Bom 1004. 
This decision was challenged before the Supreme Court 
unsuccessfully. It was thus urged that since possession of 
the said flats had been handed over in the year 1940 on 
account of the need of the Police Department then and 
about 84 years had elapsed since handing over of such 
possession, the petitioners were entitled to receive back 
possession of the same.
4. Mr. Mohit Jadhav, learned Additional Government 
Pleader opposed aforesaid submissions. Inviting attention 
to the pleadings in the writ petition, it was submitted that 
in absence of any written order of requisition, it was not 
open for the petitioners to contend that the respondents had 
requisitioned the two flats in the year 1940. On the contrary, 
it was submitted that possession of the same was handed 
over voluntarily and monthly amounts were being paid 
to the predecessor of the petitioners, which was evident 
from the record. According to him, the grievance made 
in the writ petition was also with regard to non-payment 
of the monthly amounts, which would thus indicate that 
the petitioners were seeking eviction of the respondents 
without terminating their license/tenancy. Attention was 
invited to the communication dated 30th July 2012 issued 
on behalf of the petitioners raising a grievance that since 
January 2008, the monthly amounts towards occupation 
of the two flats were not being paid. The aforesaid would 
therefore indicate that there was no requisition of the said 
premises and in fact, on the basis of an oral agreement, 
the respondents were put in possession. It was further 
submitted that this Court had entertained a somewhat 
similar grievance in Writ Petition Nos.1429 of 1990 and 
1430 of 1990 (Anil Harish and Ors. Vs. Chief Secretary, 
Government of Maharashtra and Anr.). The said writ 
petitions had been allowed by the judgment dated 23rd 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
621
Neha Chandrakant Shroff & Anr. v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
April 2004 and an order of eviction along with award of 
damages came to be passed. The said judgment was 
challenged before the Supreme Court and by it’s judgment 
dated 15th November 2007 (Chief Secretary, Government 
of Maharashtra and Anr. Vs. Anil Harish and Ors.) the 
appeal was allowed and the judgment of this Court was 
set aside on the ground that the remedy available to the 
petitioners therein under the Maharashtra Rent Control 
Act, 1999 ought to have been invoked especially since 
that was the statutory remedy available. The High Court in 
exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution 
of India ought not to have entertained the writ petition. On 
this basis, it was urged that in the absence of any written 
order of requisition, the prayers made by the petitioners 
may not be granted and the petitioners be directed to avail 
the statutory remedy.
5. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at 
length and with their assistance, we have perused the 
documentary material on record. It is an admitted position 
that sometime in the year 1940, possession of Flat Nos.11 
and 12 was voluntarily handed over by the predecessor 
of the petitioners to the Police Authorities. It is further 
admitted that there is no written order requisitioning 
the aforesaid two flats for temporary use by the Police 
Authorities. The dispute however is with regard to nature of 
occupation of the Police Authorities. While the petitioners 
seek to contend that such occupation is pursuant to 
the two flats being requisitioned for use of the Police 
Authorities, the respondents contend that having paid 
monthly amounts to the predecessor of the petitioners 
and thereafter to the petitioners, the occupation of the 
Police Department is not pursuant to any requisition of 
the premises and that its possession is permissive in 
nature. The documentary material on record in the form 
of information supplied under the provisions of the Act 
of 2005 indicates that there is no written Lease Deed on 
the basis of which the Police Authorities have entered 
into possession. The documents also show that monthly 
amounts were paid regularly till December, 2007 and the 
622
Supreme Court Reports
petitioners had made a grievance that since January, 
2008, such payments were not being made. On the 
basis of the material on record, it cannot be concluded 
that the occupation of the Police Authorities is pursuant 
to any order of requisition. There being a dispute with 
regard to the nature of their occupation, it would not be 
expedient for this Court to factually adjudicate this aspect 
and record a finding as regards the nature of occupation 
of the respondents. We thus find that there is no material 
on record to substantiate the petitioners’ claim that the 
said two flats were requisitioned on the basis of which 
the Police Authorities entered into possession. 
6. It is true that the Act of 1948 came into force after 
possession of the two flats was taken over in the year 1940. 
The same however would not have material bearing on this 
issue in the light of the fact that the nature of possession 
of the respondents cannot be stated to be pursuant to 
any order of requisition. The ratio of the decisions relied 
upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners cannot be 
applied to the facts of the present case.
Heavy reliance was placed by the learned counsel for the 
petitioners on the orders passed in various writ petitions, 
as referred above, along with which this writ petition was 
to be heard. However, perusal of all the orders indicates 
that the parties therein had arrived at a settlement and 
had filed Consent Minutes of Order. The writ petitions 
were not adjudicated on merits but the respondents 
therein agreed to handover possession of the premises 
in question therein. Hence, on facts, the aforesaid 
adjudication cannot be taken into consideration. On the 
contrary, the learned Additional Government Pleader is 
justified in relying upon the decision of the Supreme Court 
in Chief Secretary, Government of Maharashtra Vs. Anil 
Harish and others (supra). 
7. We are not inclined to exercise jurisdiction under Article 
226 of the Constitution of India in view of the fact that 
there is no written order of requisition. Since the manner 
in which the respondents entered into possession of the 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
623
Neha Chandrakant Shroff & Anr. v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
premises is disputed, liberty is granted to the petitioners 
to avail appropriate remedy as available in law to seek 
appropriate reliefs. Keeping all points raised in the writ 
petition on merits open, the same is dismissed with no 
order as to costs. Rule stands discharged.”
3.	
Heard the learned counsel appearing for the appellants and Mr. 
Shreyas Lalit, the learned counsel appearing for the State of 
Maharashtra and others.
4.	
Mr. Nitin Pawar, the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Office of the 
Commissioner of Police (Headquarter), Mumbai, Maharashtra is also 
personally present today in the Court. We had some dialogue with 
Mr. Pawar. According to the Officer, present before us, there are 
two families of Police Officers residing in the two flats in question. In 
fact, it has come to our notice today for the first time that the flats in 
question are not being utilized as an Office of the Police Department 
but two families are in fact residing in these two flats in question. 
The monthly rent of each flat admeasuring 600 square feet situated 
in South Bombay is Rs.700/- (Rupees Seven Hundred) per month. 
5.	
This is the right stage for us to look into the two orders passed by 
us dated 28.01.2025 and 03.03.2025 respectively. The order dated 
28.01.2025 and 03.03.2025 respectively read thus:-
ORDER DATED 28.01.2025
“1. The respondents are in occupation of two flats of the 
ownership of the petitioners herein since the year 1940. At 
the relevant point of time, there was no written document 
in the form of rent note or lease agreement or any other 
form of understanding reduced into writing. However, it is 
not in dispute that the department is occupying two flats 
as on date.
2. It appears that up to the year 2007 a very paltry amount 
was being paid towards rent. Thereafter nothing was been 
paid till 2024. We are informed that again in 2004 some 
amount was paid.
3. The petitioners are desperately seeking to get back 
the possession of the property, in question, which is in 
occupation of the respondents.
624
Supreme Court Reports
4. We are of the view that the parties should sit together 
and try to resolve the dispute. If the respondents want to 
retain the possession they must enter into an appropriate 
lease agreement providing for payment of rent determinable 
on the market value of the property. Of course this would 
be without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the 
petitioners, they propose to raise before this Court while 
assailing the impugned judgment passed of the High Court.
5. It has been more than 80 years that the department has 
been occupying the two flats. The department can very 
easily shift to any other place of their choice and allow 
the petitioners to use their own property.
6. We hope and trust that Mr. Shreyas Lalit, the learned 
counsel appearing for the respondents is able to persuade 
his clients to bring an end to this litigation by some equitable 
settlement.
7. Post this matter after four weeks.”
ORDER DATED 28.01.2025
“1. The learned counsel appearing for the parties jointly 
submitted that talks of settlement are in progress. We are 
fully conversant with the facts of this case. We once again 
request Mr. Shreyas U. Lalit, learned counsel appearing 
for the respondents to impress upon his client to resolve 
the dispute in any circumstances.
2. We reiterate once again that the State cannot retain 
the property for all times to come. We are informed that 
the petitioners herein have put forward three proposals 
before the State:
(I) That the State may retain the premises by paying 
market rent as on date.
(II) The State may either outright purchase the property; or
(III) The State should hand over vacant and peaceful 
possession of the property.
3. We are of the view that all the three proposals are very 
reasonable and State must consider either of the three 
very seriously.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
625
Neha Chandrakant Shroff & Anr. v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
4. We adjourn this matter for one last time, on the next 
date, if some settlement is placed on record well and good, 
otherwise we shall proceed to pass final orders.
5. List the matter after four weeks.”
6.	
The orders dated 28.01.2025 and 03.03.2025 respectively quoted 
above make the picture abundantly clear. There is no response 
worth the name at the end of the respondents to the three proposals 
referred to by us in our order dated 3.04.2025. In such circumstances, 
we need not hear the parties anymore on any other issues. We set 
aside the impugned judgment passed by the High Court and allow 
the original writ petition preferred by the appellants before the High 
Court. We grant four months’ time to the respondents from today 
to handover vacant and peaceful possession of both the flats in 
question to the appellants along with the arrears of rent accrued till 
the date of handing over of the possession of the two flats. We are 
informed that the Department has not been paying rent from 2008 
onwards. The rent shall be calculated accordingly and be paid to 
the appellants. 
7.	
We direct Shri Nitin Pawar, the Deputy Commissioner of Police 
who is personally present in the court to file an undertaking on oath 
stating that the Department shall hand over vacant and peaceful 
possession of the two flats in question definitely to the appellants 
within a period of four months from today. Such undertaking in the 
form of affidavit shall be filed within one week from today before the 
Registry of this Court.
8.	
We are happy that we have been able to do justice with the appellants 
who have been frantically trying to get back their property (two flats) 
in question which the State occupied way back in the year 1940 
without any written order requisitioning the two flats for temporary 
use by the Police authorities or any lease deed in writing. It appears 
that the High Court was hesitant to exercise its writ jurisdiction as 
it got confused on the aspect of nature of possession. The High 
Court found the possession to be permissive in nature. In such 
circumstances, the High Court thought fit to relegate the appellants 
to avail alternative remedy of filing a suit. 
9.	
The High Court should have kept the year in mind i.e. 1940. This 
country was ruled by the Britishers. The country was fighting hard 
to seek independence from the Britishers. Bombay in the year 
626
Supreme Court Reports
1940 was altogether different. At the relevant point of time, the 
Department perhaps might have persuaded the appellants or their 
predecessors in title to part with the possession of the two flats for 
the Police Department. However, it has been now 84 years that the 
Police Department has been in occupation and use of the two flats. 
Look at the conduct of the Department. We are informed that past 
eighteen years even rent has not been paid. 
10.	 To ask the appellants to file a suit and recover the possession 
would be like adding insult to the injury. At this point of time, if the 
appellants are asked to institute a suit, we wonder how many years 
it would take by the time the litigation would come to an end if at all 
it reaches upto the highest Court of the country. These are the hard 
facts, the High Courts are expected to keep in mind in today’s times. 
11.	 The rule of exclusion of writ jurisdiction by availability of an alternative 
remedy is a rule of discretion and not one of compulsion. There can 
be many contingencies in which the High Court may be justified in 
exercising its writ jurisdiction inspite of availability of an alternative 
remedy. 
12.	 This is one of those cases wherein the High Court should have readily 
exercised its writ jurisdiction. The constitutional powers vested in the 
High Court or the Supreme Court cannot be fettered by any alternative 
remedy available to the party concerned. Injustice, whenever and 
wherever it takes place, should be struck down as an anathema to 
the rule of law and the provisions of the Constitution.
13.	 With the aforesaid, the appeal stands disposed of.
14.	 Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain