[2025] 3 S.C.R. 450 : 2025 INSC 325
Smt. Lavanya C & Anr. 
v. 
Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deseased By LRs. & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 13999 of 2024)
05 March 2025
[Pankaj Mithal and Sanjay Karol,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court was correct in setting aside the order of the 
Trial Court holding the appellants not guilty of wilful disobedience 
of their undertaking given to the Court.
Headnotes†
Contempt of Court – When – Appellants gave undertaking 
before the Trial Court to not alienate the property which 
was the subject matter of the suit – Respondents filed 
application alleging violation thereof – Trial Court held that 
the Appellants were not guilty of wilful disobedience of 
the undertaking given by them – Order set aside by High 
Court – Correctness: 
Held: Plea of the appellants that the undertaking to not alienate 
the subject matter property was given by the lawyer without 
requisite authority, not accepted – The undertaking in question 
was given in July 2007 and reiterated in August 2007 –Trial Court 
made such an undertaking into an order of the Court in November 
2007, which was extended at regular intervals – The application 
for violation of the undertaking/order of the Court under Order 
XXXIX Rule 2A was made in 2011 i.e., after a period of four and a 
half years – Had the undertaking been without requisite authority, 
the appellants were well within their rights to seek discharge of 
that order, however, no such step was taken – Alienation of the 
subject matter property was despite express orders of the Court 
and thus, in violation thereof – High Court rightly punished the 
appellants for contempt of Court – However, order modified, as 
directed – Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – Or. XXXIX R. 2A. 
[Paras 6, 11, 12, 14]
* Author
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
451
Smt. Lavanya C & Anr. v. 
Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deseased By LRs. & Ors.
Legal Profession – Relationship between Advocate and 
client – Nature:
Held: A lawyer-client relationship is fiduciary in nature and the 
former is cast in terms of agency of the latter – The lawyer must 
respect the decision-making right of the client – Any undertaking 
given to a Court cannot be without requisite authority from the 
client. [Para 9]
Case Law Cited
Samee Khan v. Bindu Khan [1998] Supp. 1 SCR 244 : (1998) 
7 SCC 59; Wander Limited & Anr. v. Antox India Pvt. Ltd. (1990) 
Supp. 1 SCC 727; Ramakant Ambalal Choksi v. Harish Ambalal 
Choksi, 2024 SCC OnLine 3538; Dalpat Kumar v. Prahlad Singh 
[1991] Supp. 3 SCR 472 : (1992) 1 SCC 719; Kanwar Singh 
Saini v. High Court of Delhi [2011] 15 SCR 972 : (2012) 4 SCC 
307; Kokkanda B. Poondacha v. K.D. Ganapathi [2011] 4 SCR 
417 : (2011) 12 SCC 600; State of U.P. v. U.P. State Law Officers' 
Assn. [1994] 1 SCR 348 : (1994) 2 SCC 204; Himalayan Coop. 
Group Housing Society v. Balwan Singh [2015] 4 SCR 616 : 
(2015) 7 SCC 373; Bar of Indian Lawyers v. National Institute 
of Communicable Diseases (2024) 8 SCC 430; Supreme Court 
Bar Assn. v. Union of India [1998] 2 SCR 795 : (1998) 4 SCC 
409 – referred to.
List of Acts
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
List of Keywords
Contempt of Court; Express violation of order of Court; Disobedience 
of Undertaking; Or. XXXIX R. 2A of Civil Procedure Code, 1908; 
Civil contempt; Fiduciary relationship between Advocate and client; 
Undertaking without requisite authority from client; Alienation of 
subject matter property; Disobedience of an order of temporary 
injunction.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 13999 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.02.2021 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bengaluru in MFA No. 7055 of 2013
452
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Radhakrishna S Hegde, Rajeev Singh.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Vikram Hegde, Abhinav Hansaraman.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol J.
1.	
This appeal arises out of judgment and order dated 23rd February 
2021/16th March, 2021 passed in Miscellaneous First Appeal 
No.7055/2013(CPC) by the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru, 
whereby the respondents before the High Court, appellants herein 
(defendants in Trial Court), were held guilty of disobedience of their 
undertaking before the Trial Court of not alienating the property, 
subject matter of the suit.
The original defendants in the Trial Court through their counsel 
gave an undertaking which was allegedly disobeyed. The plaintiffs 
aggrieved thereby filed the case, which was dismissed, and they 
appealed to the High Court, ultimately resulting in a favourable order. 
The original defendants now aggrieved by being held in contempt, 
are appellants herein.
2.	
A brief resume of facts leading to the appeal are :
2.1	 The respondents herein were the original plaintiffs in Original 
Suit No.4191 of 2007 seeking a declaration to the effect that 
agreement between the parties dated 30th April 2004, i.e., 
‘Joint Development Agreement’1 to be “revoked rescinded and 
terminated.” The JDA was entered into regarding the construction 
of residential apartments within a period of 24 months, on a 
turnkey basis.
2.2	 Said construction was to be completed by 31st October 2006. 
However, the same could not be done. Legal notice intimating 
1	
‘JDA’, for short
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
453
Smt. Lavanya C & Anr. v. 
Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deseased By LRs. & Ors.
the cancellation of the JDA was issued on 23rd March 2007, 
and eventually, the subject Original Suit came to be filed.
2.3	 The learned Trial Court eventually concluded vide judgment 
and order dated 2nd January 2017 that the plaintiffs could not 
prove that the construction made was in violation of the JDA and 
instead, the defendants proved that the construction made by 
them was in accordance thereof. It was held that the plaintiffs 
were not entitled to the declaration and permanent injunction, 
as prayed for.
2.4	 In the pendency of the above proceedings, record reveals that 
the counsel for the defendants undertook, on two occasions, i.e., 
11th July 2007 and 13th August 2007 that they will not alienate 
the subject property to any third person. Allegedly, however, 
such undertaking was not abided by, which led to the filing of 
Interlocutory Application No.3 that came to be registered as 
Civil Misc. Application No.38 of 2011 under Order XXXIX Rule 
2A of the Civil Procedure Code, 19082.
2.5	 The concerned Court framed the following issues :
"1)	 Whether the petitioners have made out a case of 
breach or willful disobedience by the respondents of 
order passed by this court in pursuance of undertaking 
given by the defendant and order of injunction dated 
17.11.2007 beyond all reasonable doubts?
2)	
What order?”
2.6	 The Court considered the jurisdiction which has been agitated, 
observing that the said power is punitive in nature and akin to 
imposing punishment for civil contempt under the Contempt of 
Courts Act, 1971. It was concluded as under :
“38. It is significant to note that advocate for petitioners 
have produced 10 photos of suit property, which 
depict that suit property is still vacant and foundation 
is lying. But, here in this case, the petitioners have 
contended that the flats were sold by the respondents 
2	
Hereafter ‘CPC’
454
inspite of Court Order. Moreover,, the description 
of the suit property is incomplete and ambiguous. 
Therefore, the averment/contention of the petitioners 
is not believable.
39. In view of aforesaid reasons and observations made, 
I can safely conclude that the petitioners are failed to 
prove their case beyond all reasonable doubt that the 
respondents are knowingly and willfully disobeyed the 
injunction order of this Court. : There is no sufficient and 
satisfactory materials on record to come to conclusion that 
the respondents have knowingly and willfully disobeyed 
and committed the breach of order of this Court. Hence, 
respondents are entitled for benefit of doubt. Therefore, I 
answer aforesaid point No.1 in Negative.
40. Point No.2 : For the foregoing reasons and in view of 
my findings and discussions, I proceed to pas the following :
ORDER
In the result, therefore this Civil Misc. petition 
(I.A. No.3) filed by the petitioners U/o XXXIX 
Rule 2A and U/s.151 of CPC against the 
respondents is liable to be rejected. Accordingly, 
it is dismissed.
Parties shall bear their own costs.”
2.7	 Aggrieved by this order, the High Court was approached by way 
of Misc. First Appeal No.7055 of 2013 (CPC) under Order XLIII 
Rule 1(r) read with 104(i) of CPC. The question to be considered 
was whether the lower Court’s order is sustainable in law. 
Impugned Judgment
3.	
A question of maintainability of the application under Order XXXIX 
Rule 2A was raised. With reference to Samee Khan v. Bindu Khan,3 it 
was held that even if the injunction order was subsequently set aside, 
the disobedience thereof is not erased. The subsequent dismissal of 
a suit does not absolve the party of liability of breach of injunction 
3	
(1998) 7 SCC 59
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
455
Smt. Lavanya C & Anr. v. 
Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deseased By LRs. & Ors.
order. That apart, it was observed that an appeal against the Trial 
Court’s dismissal of the Original Suit was also pending before the 
High Court bearing R.F.A.No.592/2017.
3.1	 The substance of the dispute is that on 11th July 2007, the 
counsel for the appellants herein filed memo as follows :
“The undersigned counsel undertake that the defendants 
have not alienate the suit schedule property to any third 
person”
3.2	 Subsequently, on two dates 13th August and 17th November, 
2007 the proceedings of the Trial Court have been taken note 
of by the Trial Court in paras 26 to 28, which read as follows :
“26. Then the matter was adjourned to 13.08.2007. On 
13.08.2007, the advocate for the defendants filed another 
memo which reads as follows :
“The undersigned counsel undertake that they 
have not alienate the suit schedule property in 
the above case.”
27. Then the trial Court ordered to list the matter on 
17.11.2007. On 17.11.2007, the defendants’ Counsel 
failed to appear before the Court. The plaintiffs’ Counsel 
submitted to the Court about the undertaking given by the 
defendants’ Counsel. Under such circumstances, the trial 
Court passed the following order:
“Parties to the suit called out. Absent. Learned 
Counsel for the plaintiff is present. Learned 
Counsel for the defendant is absent. On 
the last date the learned Counsel for 
the defendants had undertaken that the 
defendants will not alienate suit property. 
Today neither defendants nor learned Counsel 
for the defendants are present. I.A. I & II 
cannot be heard as the defendants and learned 
Counsel for defendant Nos.1 to 3 are absent. 
Hence, it is hereby ordered that defendants 
1 to 3 shall not alienate the suit property 
till next date. For hearing of IA I & II and to 
456
call the parties under Section 89 of CPC. Call 
on 08.12.2007.”
28. That order was extended from time to time. Subsequent 
to 17.11.2007, the defendants executed the sale deeds 
under Exs.P3 to P5, Ex.P7 to P13, the dates of which 
are as follows :
Ex.P3–19.11.2007 Ex.P4-03.12.2008 
Ex.P5–01.07.2008 Ex.P7-15.06.2009
Ex.P8–06.08.2008 Ex.P9-13.12.2011
Ex.P10–19.11.2007Ex.P11-01.07.2008
Ex.P12-03.12.2008 Ex.P13-15.06.2009”
3.3	 The Court citing various judicial pronouncements observed 
that there was no merit in the contention that injunction order 
is invalid. The order of the lower Court was set aside, and 
the appellants herein were held guilty of disobedience of their 
undertaking made before the Trial Court.
3.4	 Vide order dated 16th March 2021 the appellants were held guilty 
of contempt of Court. Contemnor No.3, namely, Chalsani R.B. 
who is the second appellant herein, was directed to be detained 
in a civil prison for a period of three months and his property, 
subject matter of suit, to be attached for a period of one year. 
Contemnor No.2, namely, Smt. Lavanya C., the first appellant 
herein, qua her it was directed that the subject matter property 
be attached for a period of one year. It was further directed 
that both the contemnors shall pay a sum of Rs.10 lakhs within 
four weeks, as compensation for the hardship caused to the 
respondents herein. The part of the order directing attachment 
was stayed for a period of 60 days. 
Our Consideration 
4.	
It is this order of the High Court which is sought to be challenged in 
this appeal. By way of the special leave petition, it has been urged, 
inter alia :
a)	
In the prayers made in the application under Order XXXIX Rule 
1 and 2, no specific prayer, restraining the parties from creating 
third party rights, has been made. The Trial Court has observed 
that the description of property is ambiguous, incomplete and 
that no satisfactory material has been brought on record to 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
457
Smt. Lavanya C & Anr. v. 
Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deseased By LRs. & Ors.
show wilful disobedience on the part of the appellants, hence, 
they are entitled to the benefit of doubt. 
b)	
There has been deliberate suppression of facts on the part of 
the respondents herein regarding construction of apartments and 
selling off a part thereof, even prior to filing of the original Suit.
c)	
An unconditional apology has been tendered before the Court 
and the appellants herein have no intent or desire to disrespect 
any order passed by a competent Court.
d)	
The sentence imposed, in the attending facts and circumstances, 
is unjustified given that the second appellant is a person of 
advanced years and suffers from various ailments.
5.	
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the 
record. The question to be considered is whether the High Court 
was correct in setting aside the order of the Court below, holding the 
appellants herein not guilty of wilful disobedience of their undertaking 
given to the Court. 
6.	
A few dates require immediate recall. The undertaking subject 
matter of controversy was given by the counsel on 11th July 2007 
and reiterated on 13th August 2007. The Trial Court made such an 
undertaking into an order of the Court on 17th November 2007. The 
same was extended at regular intervals. The application for violation 
of the undertaking/order of the Court under Order XXXIX Rule 2A was 
made in 2011. An order was made dismissing the application on 2nd 
August 2013. Immediately thereafter, an appeal was filed before the 
High Court. In the pendency of this appeal, the Original Suit came to 
be decided on 2nd January 2017. An appeal against such dismissal 
of the Original Suit was pending before the High Court on the date 
that the impugned judgment came to be passed. 
7.	
Although of primary concern, in this appeal is the sentence of 
imprisonment and compensation to be paid by the appellants herein, 
it would be apposite to take note of the contours of Order XXXIX 
Rule 1, Rule 2 and Rule 2A. 
7.1	 A Three-Judge Bench in Wander Limited & Anr. v. Antox 
India Pvt. Ltd.4 observed as follows :
4	
(1990) Supp. 1 SCC 727
458
“9. .....
“...is to protect the plaintiff against injury by 
violation of his rights for which he could not 
adequately be compensated in damages 
recoverable in the action if the uncertainty were 
resolved in his favour at the trial. The need for 
such protection must be weighed against the 
corresponding need of the defendant to be 
protected against injury resulting from his having 
been prevented from exercising his own legal 
rights for which he could not be adequately 
compensated. The court must weigh one need 
against another and determine where the 
‘balance of convenience’ lies.”
x
x
x
x
14. The appeals before the Division Bench were against 
the exercise of discretion by the Single Judge. In such 
appeals, the appellate court will not interfere with the 
exercise of discretion of the court of first instance and 
substitute its own discretion except where the discretion 
has been shown to have been exercised arbitrarily, or 
capriciously or perversely or where the court had ignored 
the settled principles of law regulating grant or refusal of 
interlocutory injunctions. An appeal against exercise of 
discretion is said to be an appeal on principle. Appellate 
court will not reassess the material and seek to reach a 
conclusion different from the one reached by the court 
below if the one reached by that court was reasonably 
possible on the material. The appellate court would 
normally not be justified in interfering with the exercise 
of discretion under appeal solely on the ground that if it 
had considered the matter at the trial stage it would have 
come to a contrary conclusion. If the discretion has been 
exercised by the trial court reasonably and in a judicial 
manner the fact that the appellate court would have taken 
a different view may not justify interference with the trial 
court’s exercise of discretion. After referring to these 
principles Gajendragadkar, J. in Printers (Mysore) Private 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
459
Smt. Lavanya C & Anr. v. 
Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deseased By LRs. & Ors.
Ltd. v. Pothan Joseph [(1960) 3 SCR 713 : AIR 1960 SC 
1156] : (SCR 721)
“... These principles are well established, but 
as has been observed by Viscount Simon in 
Charles Osenton & Co. v. Jhanaton [1942 AC 
130] ‘...the law as to the reversal by a court of 
appeal of an order made by a judge below in 
the exercise of his discretion is well established, 
and any difficulty that arises is due only to 
the application of well settled principles in an 
individual case’.”
The appellate judgment does not seem to defer to this 
principle.”
(Emphasis supplied)
7.2	 A recent judgment of this Court in Ramakant Ambalal Choksi 
v. Harish Ambalal Choksi,5 referring to Dalpat Kumar v. 
Prahlad Singh 6 has reiterated the principles governing the 
grant of temporary injunction.
7.3	 The aspect of disobedience of an order of temporary injunction 
has been discussed in detail in Kanwar Singh Saini v. High 
Court of Delhi,7 in the following terms :
“17. Application under Order 39 Rule 2-A CPC lies only 
where disobedience/breach of an injunction granted or 
order complained of was one that is granted by the court 
under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC, which is naturally to 
enure during the pendency of the suit. However, once a 
suit is decreed, the interim order, if any, merges into the 
final order. No litigant can derive any benefit from mere 
pendency of case in a court of law, as the interim order 
always merges in the final order to be passed in the case 
and if the case is ultimately dismissed, the interim order 
stands nullified automatically. (Vide A.R. Sircar v. State 
5	
2024 SCC OnLine 3538
6	
(1992) 1 SCC 719
7	
(2012) 4 SCC 307
460
of U.P. [1993 Supp (2) SCC 734 : 1993 SCC (L&S) 896 : 
(1993) 24 ATC 832], Shiv Shanker v. U.P. SRTC [1995 
Supp (2) SCC 726 : 1995 SCC (L&S) 1018 : (1995) 30 
ATC 317], Arya Nagar Inter College v. Sree Kumar Tiwary 
[(1997) 4 SCC 388 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 967 : AIR 1997 SC 
3071], GTC Industries Ltd. v. Union of India [(1998) 3 SCC 
376 : AIR 1998 SC 1566] and Jaipur Municipal Corpn. v. 
C.L. Mishra [(2005) 8 SCC 423].)
18. In case there is a grievance of non-compliance 
with the terms of the decree passed in the civil suit, the 
remedy available to the aggrieved person is to approach 
the execution court under Order 21 Rule 32 CPC which 
provides for elaborate proceedings in which the parties 
can adduce their evidence and can examine and cross-
examine the witnesses as opposed to the proceedings in 
contempt which are summary in nature. Application under 
Order 39 Rule 2-A CPC is not maintainable once the suit 
stood decreed. Law does not permit to skip the remedies 
available under Order 21 Rule 32 CPC and resort to the 
contempt proceedings for the reason that the court has 
to exercise its discretion under the 1971 Act when an 
effective and alternative remedy is not available to the 
person concerned. Thus, when the matter relates to the 
infringement of a decree or decretal order embodies rights, 
as between the parties, it is not expedient to invoke and 
exercise contempt jurisdiction, in essence, as a mode of 
executing the decree or merely because other remedies 
may take time or are more circumlocutory in character. 
Thus, the violation of permanent injunction can be set 
right in executing the proceedings and not the contempt 
proceedings. There is a complete fallacy in the argument 
that the provisions of Order 39 Rule 2-A CPC would also 
include the case of violation or breach of permanent 
injunction granted at the time of passing of the decree.”
7.4	 In Samee Khan (supra), it was observed that :
“12. But the position under Rule 2-A of Order 39 is 
different. Even if the injunction order was subsequently 
set aside, the disobedience does not get erased. It may 
be a different matter that the rigour of such disobedience 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
461
Smt. Lavanya C & Anr. v. 
Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deseased By LRs. & Ors.
may be toned down if the order is subsequently set aside. 
For what purpose is the property to be attached in the 
case of disobedience of the order of injunction? Sub-rule 
(2) provides that if the disobedience or breach continues 
beyond one year from the date of attachment, the court 
is empowered to sell the property under attachment and 
compensate the affected party from such sale proceeds.”
8.	
There is no question as to the maintainability of the application before 
this Court. It is also true that the order, in the challenge against which 
the impugned judgment was passed, was made in the pendency of 
the original suit and, therefore, it is saved from that bar as well. No 
error, therefore, can be found on the exercise of such jurisdiction. 
9.	
The next point which needs consideration is the relationship 
between an advocate and his client. The appellants have cast 
certain aspersions on their counsel to the effect that he, allegedly, 
gave the undertaking, germane to the instant controversy, without 
express authorization. This Court has, time and again, taken note 
of the fiduciary relationship between an advocate and his client. We 
may notice a few decisions as follows:
9.1	 In Kokkanda B. Poondacha v. K.D. Ganapathi,8 it was held :
“12. At this stage, we may also advert to the nature of 
relationship between a lawyer and his client, which is 
solely founded on trust and confidence. A lawyer cannot 
pass on the confidential information to anyone else. This 
is so because he is a fiduciary of his client, who reposes 
trust and confidence in the lawyer. Therefore, he has a 
duty to fulfil all his obligations towards his client with care 
and act in good faith. Since the client entrusts the whole 
obligation of handling legal proceedings to an advocate, 
he has to act according to the principles of uberrima fides 
i.e. the utmost good faith, integrity, fairness and loyalty.
x
x
x
14. An analysis of the above reproduced Rules shows 
that one of the most important duties imposed upon an 
advocate is to uphold the interest of the client fearlessly 
8	
(2011) 12 SCC 600 
462
by all fair and honourable means. An advocate cannot 
ordinarily withdraw from engagement without sufficient 
cause and without giving reasonable and sufficient notice 
to the client. If he has reason to believe that he will be 
a witness in the case, the advocate should not accept a 
brief or appear in the case.”
9.2	 The nature of the profession was highlighted by a Bench of 
this Court in State of U.P. v. U.P. State Law Officers’ Assn.,9 
in the following terms :
“14. Legal profession is essentially a service-oriented 
profession. The ancestor of today’s lawyer was no more 
than a spokesman who rendered his services to the needy 
members of the society by articulating their case before 
the authorities that be. The services were rendered without 
regard to the remuneration received or to be received. 
With the growth of litigation, lawyering became a full-time 
occupation and most of the lawyers came to depend 
upon it as the sole source of livelihood. The nature of 
the service rendered by the lawyers was private till the 
Government and the public bodies started engaging them 
to conduct cases on their behalf. The Government and the 
public bodies engaged the services of the lawyers purely 
on a contractual basis either for a specified case or for a 
specified or an unspecified period. Although the contract in 
some cases prohibited the lawyers from accepting private 
briefs, the nature of the contract did not alter from one of 
professional engagement to that of employment. The lawyer 
of the Government or a public body was not its employee 
but was a professional practitioner engaged to do the 
specified work. This is so even today, though the lawyers 
on the full-time rolls of the Government and the public 
bodies are described as their law officers. It is precisely 
for this reason that in the case of such law officers, the 
saving clause of Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules 
waives the prohibition imposed by the said rule against the 
acceptance by a lawyer of a full-time employment.
9	
1994 (2) SCC 204
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
463
Smt. Lavanya C & Anr. v. 
Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deseased By LRs. & Ors.
15. The relationship between the lawyer and his client is 
one of trust and confidence. The client engages a lawyer 
for personal reasons and is at liberty to leave him also, for 
the same reasons. He is under no obligation to give reasons 
for withdrawing his brief from his lawyer. The lawyer in turn 
is not an agent of his client but his dignified, responsible 
spokesman. He is not bound to tell the court every fact or 
urge every proposition of law which his client wants him 
to do, however irrelevant it may be. He is essentially an 
adviser to his client and is rightly called a counsel in some 
jurisdictions. Once acquainted with the facts of the case, it 
is the lawyer’s discretion to choose the facts and the points 
of law which he would advance. Being a responsible officer 
of the court and an important adjunct of the administration 
of justice, the lawyer also owes a duty to the court as well 
as to the opposite side. He has to be fair to ensure that 
justice is done. He demeans himself if he acts merely as 
a mouthpiece of his client. This relationship between the 
lawyer and the private client is equally valid between him 
and the public bodies.”
9.3	 Observations made in Himalayan Coop. Group Housing 
Society v. Balwan Singh,10 by a Bench of three Judges are 
also instructive for our purposes presently :
“22. Apart from the above, in our view lawyers are 
perceived to be their client’s agents. The law of agency 
may not strictly apply to the client-lawyer’s relationship 
as lawyers or agents, lawyers have certain authority and 
certain duties. Because lawyers are also fiduciaries, their 
duties will sometimes be more demanding than those 
imposed on other agents. The authority-agency status 
affords the lawyers to act for the client on the subject-
matter of the retainer. One of the most basic principles 
of the lawyer-client relationship is that lawyers owe 
fiduciary duties to their clients. As part of those duties, 
lawyers assume all the traditional duties that agents 
owe to their principals and, thus, have to respect the 
10	
(2015) 7 SCC 373 
464
client’s autonomy to make decisions at a minimum, as to 
the objectives of the representation. Thus, according to 
generally accepted notions of professional responsibility, 
lawyers should follow the client’s instructions rather than 
substitute their judgment for that of the client. The law 
is now well settled that a lawyer must be specifically 
authorised to settle and compromise a claim, that merely 
on the basis of his employment he has no implied or 
ostensible authority to bind his client to a compromise/
settlement. To put it alternatively that a lawyer by virtue 
of retention, has the authority to choose the means for 
achieving the client’s legal goal, while the client has the 
right to decide on what the goal will be. If the decision 
in question falls within those that clearly belong to the 
client, the lawyer’s conduct in failing to consult the client 
or in making the decision for the client, is more likely to 
constitute ineffective assistance of counsel.
x
x
x
30. The Privy Council in Sourendra Nath Mitra v. Tarubala 
Dasi [(1929-30) 57 IA 133 : (1930) 31 LW 803 : AIR 1930 
PC 158] , has made the following two observations which 
hold relevance to the present discussion : (IA pp. 140-41)
“Two observations may be added. First, the 
implied authority of counsel is not an appendage 
of office, a dignity added by the courts to the 
status of barrister or advocate at law. It is 
implied in the interests of the client, to give the 
fullest beneficial effect to his employment of 
the advocate. Secondly, the implied authority 
can always be countermanded by the express 
directions of the client. No advocate has actual 
authority to settle a case against the express 
instructions of his client. If he considers such 
express instructions contrary to the interests 
of his client, his remedy is to return his brief.”
(See: Jamilabai Abdul Kadar v. Shankarlal Gulabchand 
[(1975) 2 SCC 609] and Svenska Handelsbanken v. Indian 
Charge Chrome Ltd. [(1994) 2 SCC 155])
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
465
Smt. Lavanya C & Anr. v. 
Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deseased By LRs. & Ors.
31. Therefore, it is the solemn duty of an advocate not to 
transgress the authority conferred on him by the client. 
It is always better to seek appropriate instructions from 
the client or his authorised agent before making any 
concession which may, directly or remotely, affect the 
rightful legal right of the client. The advocate represents 
the client before the court and conducts proceedings on 
behalf of the client. He is the only link between the court 
and the client. Therefore his responsibility is onerous. He 
is expected to follow the instructions of his client rather 
than substitute his judgment.
32. Generally, admissions of fact made by a counsel 
are binding upon their principals as long as they are 
unequivocal; where, however, doubt exists as to a 
purported admission, the court should be wary to 
accept such admissions until and unless the counsel 
or the advocate is authorised by his principal to make 
such admissions. Furthermore, a client is not bound 
by a statement or admission which he or his lawyer 
was not authorised to make. A lawyer generally has no 
implied or apparent authority to make an admission or 
statement which would directly surrender or conclude 
the substantial legal rights of the client unless such 
an admission or statement is clearly a proper step 
in accomplishing the purpose for which the lawyer 
was employed. We hasten to add neither the client 
nor the court is bound by the lawyer’s statements or 
admissions as to matters of law or legal conclusions. 
Thus, according to generally accepted notions of 
professional responsibility, lawyers should follow the 
client’s instructions rather than substitute their judgment 
for that of the client. We may add that in some cases, 
lawyers can make decisions without consulting the client. 
While in others, the decision is reserved for the client. 
It is often said that the lawyer can make decisions as 
to tactics without consulting the client, while the client 
has a right to make decisions that can affect his rights.”
(Emphasis supplied)
466
9.4	 Recently, a coordinate Bench of this Court in Bar of Indian 
Lawyers v. National Institute of Communicable Diseases,11 
which also comprised one of us (Mithal J.) speaking through 
Trivedi J., observed :
“51. When we examine the relationship between an 
advocate and his client from this point of view, the following 
unique attributes become clear:
51.1. Advocates are generally perceived to be their client’s 
agents and owe fiduciary duties to their clients.
51.2. Advocates are fastened with all the traditional duties 
that agents owe to their principals. For example, advocates 
have to respect the client’s autonomy to make decisions 
at a minimum, as to the objectives of the representation.
51.3. Advocates are not entitled to make concessions 
or give any undertaking to the court without express 
instructions from the client.
51.4. It is the solemn duty of an advocate not to transgress 
the authority conferred on him by his client.
51.5. An advocate is bound to seek appropriate instructions 
from the client or his authorised agent before taking any 
action or making any statement or concession which may, 
directly or remotely, affect the legal rights of the client.
51.6. The Advocate represents the client before the court 
and conducts proceedings on behalf of the client. He is 
the only link between the court and the client. Therefore, 
his responsibility is onerous. He is expected to follow the 
instructions of his client rather than substitute his judgment.”
(Emphasis supplied)
10.	 The above judgments make clear that a lawyer-client relationship is 
fiduciary in nature and the former is cast in terms of agency of the 
latter. It is also clear that the lawyer is to respect the decision-making 
right of the client. It flows from this that any undertaking given to a 
Court cannot be without requisite authority from the client. 
11	
(2024) 8 SCC 430
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
467
Smt. Lavanya C & Anr. v. 
Vittal Gurudas Pai Since Deseased By LRs. & Ors.
11.	 The appellants herein would have us believe that the undertaking 
to not alienate the subject matter property, which, undoubtedly, has 
far-reaching implications, extending over a large period of time. We 
find such a situation difficult to accept. The undertaking, subject 
matter of controversy, was given in July 2007 and the miscellaneous 
application was filed in the year 2011, i.e., after a period of four and 
a half years. Had the situation been that the said undertaking was 
without requisite authority, the clients were perfectly within their rights 
to seek discharge of that order, however, no such step was taken. 
12.	 The same undertaking was re-emphasized a month later, on 13th 
August 2007 and was later made into an order of the Court which, as 
already observed supra, was extended from time to time. Alienation 
of the subject matter property despite express orders of the Court, 
in our view, entirely justify the stand taken by the High Court in 
punishing the appellants for contempt of Court. 
13.	 The powers of contempt of Court have been provided for the purposes 
of ensuring that the dignity and majesty of law is always maintained. 
Such purpose is aptly captured in the words of the Constitution 
Bench in Supreme Court Bar Assn. v. Union of India12, as follows:
“42. The contempt of court is a special jurisdiction to be 
exercised sparingly and with caution whenever an act 
adversely affects the administration of justice or which tends 
to impede its course or tends to shake public confidence 
in the judicial institutions. This jurisdiction may also be 
exercised when the act complained of adversely affects 
the majesty of law or dignity of the courts. The purpose of 
contempt jurisdiction is to uphold the majesty and dignity 
of the courts of law. It is an unusual type of jurisdiction 
combining “the jury, the judge and the hangman” and it is 
so because the court is not adjudicating upon any claim 
between litigating parties. This jurisdiction is not exercised 
to protect the dignity of an individual judge but to protect 
the administration of justice from being maligned. In the 
general interest of the community it is imperative that the 
authority of courts should not be imperilled and there should 
be no unjustifiable interference in the administration of 
12	
(1998) 4 SCC 409 
468
justice. It is a matter between the court and the contemner 
and third parties cannot intervene. It is exercised in a 
summary manner in aid of the administration of justice, the 
majesty of law and the dignity of the courts. No such act 
can be permitted which may have the tendency to shake 
the public confidence in the fairness and impartiality of 
the administration of justice.”
When there has been an express violation of an order of a Court, as 
is in the present case, the exercise of contempt jurisdiction cannot be 
faulted with. The judgment of the High Court is, therefore, confirmed. 
14.	 In the attending facts and circumstances, keeping in view the fact 
that at the time of filing of this appeal, the appellant No.1 herein, 
who was the contemnor No.3 before the High Court, was 63 years 
of age and today must approximately be of 68 years of age, we 
modify the impugned order to the extent that the three months 
confinement in civil prison shall stand deleted. The rest of the order 
regarding attachment of property remains undisturbed. Additionally, 
the amount of compensation payable by the appellants herein shall 
stand enhanced from a sum of Rs.10 lakhs to Rs.13 lakhs.
15.	 The appeal is partly allowed and disposed of with the above 
modification to the impugned order. The amount of compensation 
shall also carry simple interest @6% from the date of the judgment 
of the lower Court, i.e., 2nd August 2013. 
Pending application, if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey