[2025] 12 S.C.R. 273 : 2025 INSC 1375
Rousanara Begum 
v. 
S.K. Salahuddin @ SK Salauddin & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No(s). 5164-5165 of 2025)
02 December 2025
[Sanjay Karol* and Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether goods given to a daughter at the time of her 
marriage by her father, or to the bridegroom, can be by application 
of law, returned to the daughter-appellant given that their marriage 
had ended in divorce.
Headnotes†
Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986 – 
s.3 – Mahr or other properties of Muslim woman to be given to 
her at the time of divorce – Goods given to a daughter at the 
time of her marriage by her father, or to the bridegroom, if by 
application of law, can be returned to the daughter-appellant 
given that their marriage had ended in divorce:
Held: s.3 deals with mehr/dower and/or other properties given 
to a woman at the time of her marriage clearing the way for the 
woman to set up a claim against her husband, or claim back from 
her husband properties given, as the case may be – Scope and 
object of 1986 Act is to secure dignity and financial protection of 
a Muslim women post her divorce which aligns with the rights of a 
women u/Art.21 – Construction of 1986 Act, thus, must keep at the 
forefront equality, dignity and autonomy and must be done where 
inherent patriarchal discrimination is still the order of the day – On 
facts, the primary basis for High Court not giving the amount and 
gold in question to the appellant-divorced muslim wife, was the 
apparent contradiction between the statement of the Kazi-marriage 
Registrar and the father of the appellant – High Court recorded 
that the latter statement regarding writing and overwriting in the 
entry in the marriage register is proved by him having produced the 
same before the Court – Mere allegation as to his conduct being 
suspicious on account of overwriting in the marriage register not 
* Author
274
Supreme Court Reports
sufficient to discard his testimony – This Court under its plenary, 
Art.136 jurisdiction does not interfere with the findings of the High 
Court simply because there are two views possible, this case, does 
not fall under this exception for the High Court missed the purposive 
construction goalpost and instead proceeded to adjudicate the 
matter purely as a civil dispute – Constitution of India prescribes an 
aspiration for all, equality which is, obviously, yet to be achieved – 
Courts, in doing their bit to this end must ground their reasoning in 
social justice adjudication – Thus, the judgment and order passed 
by the High Court set aside – Respondent to remit the amount 
directly into the bank account of the appellant. [Paras 8-10]
Case Law Cited
Daniel Latifi v. Union of India [2001] Supp. 3 SCR 419 : (2001) 
7 SCC 740 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal Code, 1860; Muslim 
Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986; Constitution 
of India; Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.
List of Keywords
Mahr; Properties of Muslim woman; Goods given to daughter at 
the time of her marriage by her father, or to bridegroom; Divorce; 
Dignity and financial protection of Muslim women post her divorce; 
Inherent patriarchal discrimination; Statement of Kazi-marriage 
Registrar; Purposive construction; Social justice adjudication.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No(s). 
5164-5165 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 24.11.2022 and 31.01.2024 
of the High Court at Calcutta in CRR No. 489 of 2019 and CRAN 
No. 9 of 2023, respectively.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Syed Mehdi Imam, Mohd Parvez Dabas, Uzmi Jamil Husain, Tabrez 
Ahmad, Ms. Pooja Kumari.
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
275
Rousanara Begum v. S.K. Salahuddin @ SK Salauddin & Anr.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Kumud Lata Das, Sukesh Ghosh, Ms. Sadhana Sandhu, 
Ms. Shikha Sandhu, Ms. Pooja Rathore, Ms. Hemangi Saikia, 
Kunal Mimani, Ms. Shraddha Chirania.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol, J.
Delay condoned.
Leave granted.
2.	
These appeals are directed against judgment and order dated 24th 
November 2022 passed in CRR No. 489 of 2019 and Order dated 
31st January 2024 passed in application for modification bearing No. 
CRAN 9 of 2023 by the High Court at Calcutta, at the instance of 
the Appellant herein, Rousanara Begum, who is the former wife of 
the Respondent No.1 - S.K Salahuddin1.
3.	
The short question which arises for consideration in these appeals 
are whether goods given to a daughter at the time of her marriage 
by her father, or to the bridegroom, can be by application of law, 
returned to the daughter, appellant herein, given that their marriage 
had ended in divorce.
4.	
The parties to the lis were married on 28th August 2005. Differences, 
however, arose shortly thereafter and the Appellant departed from 
her matrimonial home on 7th May 2009. Subsequently, she filed an 
application under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
19732 and initiated proceedings under Section 498-A, Indian Penal 
Code, 18603. The marriage eventually ended in divorce on 13th 
December 2011. Thereafter, she approached the Court4 under 
Section 3 of The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) 
1	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Respondent’
2	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘CRPC’
3	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘IPC’
4	
Misc. Case No. 149/2011 before Additional CJM, Bolpur District Birbhum
276
Supreme Court Reports
Act, 19865 seeking the return of total of Rs. 17,67,980/-. This amount 
was arrived at in the following terms:
“6. The petitioner is entitled to receive a total amont of 
Rs.17,67,980/- from the opposite party, which includes the 
dower amount of Rs. 1,50,000/-, dowry of Rs.7,00,000/-, 
30 (thirty) Bhori gold ornaments worth Rs.9,00,000/-, the 
value of the fridge and stabilizer Rs.10,700/-, Panasonic TV 
and other items worth Rs.18,140/-, showcase Rs.3,000/-, 
box bed Rs. 19,000/-, dressing table Rs.2,500/-, steel 
almirah Rs.5,500/-, steel mirror Rs.2,100/-, sofa set 
Rs.2,000/-, dining table Rs. 1,720/-, and bedding  
Rs.3,320/-, and she has claimed it.”
It is these proceedings that, after multiple rounds, have travelled to 
this Court. Before proceeding to the merits of the matter, we must 
take note of this history.
4.1.	 The Learned CJM vide order dated 26th June 2014 allowed the 
application and granted a total of Rs.8.3 lacs as against the 
claim of Rs. 17.5 lacs.
4.2.	 Both parties preferred revision petitions before the learned 
Session Judge who remanded the matter for afresh consideration 
allowing the evidence of marriage registrar to be entered.
4.3.	 On remand, the learned Additional Judicial Magistrate by order 
dated 23rd February 2015 once again decreed the matter in 
favour of the appellant granting a total of Rs.8 lacs along with 
30 bhories of gold ornaments.
4.4.	 Aggrieved thereby the respondent preferred the revision petition 
and the learned Additional Sessions Judge by order dated 21st 
July 2015 allowed the same and once again remanded the 
matter for additional evidence and fresh trial.
4.5.	 The Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bolpur in terms 
of judgment dated 27th April 2017 framed three issues for 
consideration- issues 1 and 2 concerned the amount of Rs.8 
lacs along with 30 bhories as previously awarded and issue 3 
pertained to the articles that were given to the bridegroom 
5	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘1986 Act’
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
277
Rousanara Begum v. S.K. Salahuddin @ SK Salauddin & Anr.
and whether any right to recover the same existed. Issue no.1 
which particularly dealt with Rs.1 lac as mehr was disposed of 
observing that the amount already stood paid by the respondent 
to the appellant and as such nothing survived for consideration. 
For issue no.2, reference was made to Exhibit 7 and Exhibit 
8-two qabilnamas or entries in the marriage register. Exhibit 8 
which is the original entry records that the father of the bride 
gave Rs.7 lacs and 30 bhories of gold to the son-in-law. Exhibit 
7 on the other hand, records that the above said amounts were 
given but it does not state that the same were particularly given 
to the bridegroom. It has been noted that this discrepancy has 
been admitted by the Marriage Registrar, however, the Court, 
considering the overall circumstances found it apposite not to 
grant too much weight to the same. It was held that the proof of 
marriage, the original qabilnama and the inability of the opposite 
party to disprove the entry in question made the opposite party 
liable to return the 7 lacs and 30 bhories gold to the appellants. 
Finally, for issue no.3 it was observed that since there was no 
entry in the concerned documents regarding the furniture, there 
was no entitlement for the same to be returned. 
4.6.	 The Respondent preferred Criminal Revision No.21/2017 which 
was dismissed by judgment dated 15th December 2018 by the 
Court of Sessions observing that there is no irregularity or 
impropriety in the order passed by the ACJM.
4.7.	 The Respondent was aggrieved and dissatisfied by the order of 
the Court of Sessions and as such went before the High Court 
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
5.	
The High Court found merit in the case made out by the respondent 
and as such allowed the petition. The reasoning is as follows:
5.1.	 The discrepancy between Exhibit 7 (marriage certificate given 
to the respondent) & 8 (marriage certificate given to appellant) 
as also the manner in which the learned ACJM dealt with the 
same was noticed but the findings were set aside given that 
the entry in Exhibit 8 tallied with the statement of the father of 
the appellant made in the proceedings under Section 498A IPC 
wherein he has categorically stated to have given the amount 
and gold in question to the respondent, that is Rs.7 lacs and 
30 bhories.
278
Supreme Court Reports
5.2.	 Regarding the maintainability of a petition under Article 227 of the 
Constitution it was observed that the power of superintendence 
also extends to judicial matters and it confers ample powers 
on the Court to prevent abuse of process of law.
6.	
It is in the aforesaid backdrop that the appellant is before us.
7.	
At the outset, it is requisite to notice Section 3(1) of the 1986 Act, 
which reads as under:
“3. Mahr or other properties of Muslim woman to be given 
to her at the time of divorce.—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, a 
divorced woman shall be entitled to—
(a) a reasonable and fair provision and maintenance to 
be made and paid to her within the iddat period by her 
former husband;
(b) where she herself maintains the children born to her 
before or after her divorce, a reasonable and fair provision 
and maintenance to be made and paid by her former 
husband for a period of two years from the respective 
dates of birth of such children;
(c) an amount equal to the sum of mahr or dower agreed 
to be paid to her at the time of her marriage or at any time 
thereafter according to Muslim law; and
(d) all the properties given to her before or at the time of 
marriage or after her marriage by her relatives or friends or 
the husband or any relatives of the husband or his friends.”
(emphasis supplied)
The Section quoted above deals with mehr/dower and/or other 
properties given to a woman at the time of her marriage- clearing 
the way for the woman to set up a claim against her husband in the 
above situations, or claim back from her husband properties given, as 
the case may be. In Daniel Latifi v. Union of India6, the Constitution 
Bench of this Court discussed the object, purpose and ambit of the 
Act and the Section reproduced supra in the following terms:
6	
(2001) 7 SCC 740
[2025] 12 S.C.R. 
279
Rousanara Begum v. S.K. Salahuddin @ SK Salauddin & Anr.
“22. Sections 3 and 4 of the Act are the principal sections, 
which are under attack before us. Section 3 opens up with 
a non obstante clause overriding all other laws …
23. Where such reasonable and fair provision and 
maintenance or the amount of mahr or dower due has not 
been made and paid or the properties referred to in clause 
(d) of sub-section (1) have not been delivered to a divorced 
woman on her divorce, she or anyone duly authorised by her 
may, on her behalf, make an application to a Magistrate for 
an order for payment of such provision and maintenance, 
mahr or dower or the delivery of properties, as the case 
may be. Rest of the provisions of Section 3 of the Act may 
not be of much relevance, which are procedural in nature.”
(emphasis supplied)
8.	
It is difficult to agree with the reasoning of the High Court. The primary 
basis for not giving the amount and gold in question to the appellant, 
as it appears from the perusal of the judgment, was the apparent 
contradiction between the statement of the Kazi i.e. marriage Registrar 
and the father of the appellant. The former stated in evidence that the 
entry recording the amount and gold being given to the husband was 
erroneously done so and it should have been that the said amount(s) 
were only given without specifying, to whom, the father of the appellant 
on the other hand stated that he had given the amount(s) in question 
to the respondent. The High Court observed that since the father was 
directly responsible for giving the said amount(s), it would be prudent 
to accept his version of events. What, apparently, the High Court 
lost sight of is the end result of the proceedings in which the said 
statement of the father was given. Those proceedings were concerned 
with Section 498A-IPC and Section(s) 3/4 of the Dowry Prohibition 
Act, 1961, and despite such a direct statement by the father of the 
appellant the learned Trial Court seized of the matter acquitted the 
respondent, a conclusion which appears to have attained finality. 
Then, it cannot be said, in our view, that the evidentiary value of 
that statement is either equal to or greater than the statement of the 
marriage registrar. The High Court records that the latter statement 
regarding writing and overwriting in the entry in the marriage register 
is proved by him having produced the same before the Court. When 
that is the case, we are at a loss to understand why his statement in 
280
Supreme Court Reports
entirety should not be accepted. Mere allegation as to his conduct 
being suspicious on account of overwriting in the marriage register 
is not sufficient to discard his testimony.
9.	
This case presents the possibility of two interpretations and whereas it 
is a settled rule that this Court under its plenary, Article 136 jurisdiction 
does not interfere with the findings of the High Court simply because 
there are two views possible, this case, in our considered view, does 
not fall under this exception for the High Court missed the purposive 
construction goalpost and instead proceeded to adjudicate the matter 
purely as a civil dispute. The Constitution of India prescribes an 
aspiration for all, i.e. equality which is, obviously, yet to be achieved. 
Courts, in doing their bit to this end must ground their reasoning in 
social justice adjudication. To put it in context, the scope and object 
of 1986 Act is concerned with securing the dignity and financial 
protection of a Muslim women post her divorce which aligns with 
the rights of a women under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. 
The construction of this Act, therefore, must keep at the forefront 
equality, dignity and autonomy and must be done in the light of lived 
experiences of women where particularly in smaller towns and rural 
areas, inherent patriarchal discrimination is still the order of the day.
10.	 The question framed above is answered accordingly. The Appeals 
are allowed as aforesaid. The judgment and order passed by the 
High Court of Calcutta with particulars as contained in paragraph 2, is 
set aside. Learned Counsel for the Appellant would supply the bank 
and other relevant details to the learned counsel for the respondent 
within three working days from the date of this judgment. The amount 
be directly remitted into the bank account of the Appellant. The 
Respondent is directed to file an affidavit of compliance with the 
Registry of this Court within six weeks thereafter. The said compliance 
certificate shall be placed on record. If the needful is not done, the 
respondent, would be liable to pay interest @9% per annum.
Pending application(s) if any shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain