[2025] 9 S.C.R. 113 : 2025 INSC 956
Kishundeo Rout & Ors.  
v. 
Govind Rao & Ors. 
(Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 22070 of 2025)
08 August 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala* and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court rightly set aside the order passed by the 
First Appellate Court by which it had accepted the plea of adverse 
possession raised by the plaintiffs for the first time in appeal and 
decreed the suit.
Headnotes†
Adverse possession – Plea – Not raised in pleadings, cannot 
be raised for the first time in appeal – Suit filed by the plaintiffs 
for cancellation of sale deed, dismissed by trial court – Appeal 
filed by the plaintiffs – First Appellate Court accepting the 
plea of adverse possession raised by them for the first time, 
allowed the appeal and decreed the suit – Second appeal filed 
by the defendants, allowed by High Court – Challenge to:
Held: The foundation for the plea of adverse possession must 
be laid in the pleadings and then an issue must be framed and 
tried – A plea not properly raised in the pleadings or in issues at 
the stage of trial would not be permitted to be raised for the first 
time at the stage of First Appeal u/s.96, CPC – The plea of adverse 
possession is always based on facts which must be asserted and 
proved – A person who claims adverse possession must show on 
what date he came into possession, what was the nature of his 
possession, whether the factum of his possession was known to 
the legal claimants and how long his possession continued and 
whether his possession was open and undisturbed – These are 
all questions of fact and unless they are asserted and proved, a 
plea of adverse possession cannot be inferred from them – Unless 
the plea of adverse possession has been specifically raised in the 
pleadings, put in issue, and then cogent and convincing evidence is 
led on a multitude of points, and an opportunity to refute the case is 
* Author
114
Supreme Court Reports
made out by the plaintiff, and availed of by the defendant, the plea 
of adverse possession cannot be allowed to be flung as a surprise, 
on an unsuspecting defendant, for the first time in appeal – In the 
present case, if plea of adverse possession had been taken in the 
plaint, and if that plea had been traversed by the defendants and 
then proper issues framed, a heavy burden would have laid on 
the plaintiffs to lead evidence in support of their hostile claim and 
a corresponding opportunity of rebuttal would have been given by 
law to the defendants – The question of adverse possession cannot 
become the subject matter of adjudication in the absence of proper 
plea, issue or proof – Petition fails, dismissed. [Paras 19, 29-31]
Pleadings – Rule of – Principle of secundum allegata et 
probata – Effect:
Held: The basic rule of law of pleadings is that a party can only 
succeed according to what he has alleged and proved, otherwise, 
on the principle of secundum allegata et probata, a party is not 
allowed to succeed, where he has not set up the case which he 
wants to substantiate – Pleadings and proof must correspond – No 
party should be prejudiced by being taken by surprise by varying 
the case as originally set up. [Paras 24, 25]
Adverse possession – Ordinarily, a question of fact however, in 
certain cases, it may be a question of law or a mixed question 
of law and facts – Determination of adverse possession – 
When can the plea of adverse possession be allowed by the 
Appellate Court to be taken up for the first time in appeal, 
stated. [Para 27, 28]
Case Law Cited
Trojan and Co., Ltd. v. RM. N. N. Nagappa Chettier [1953] 1 SCR 
789 – referred to.
Ganda Singh and Ors. v. Ram Narain Singh, ILR (1959) 1 P&H 
385; Municipal Board, Etawah v. Mt. Ram Sri and Another, AIR 
1931 All. 670; Krishna Churn Baisack and Others v. Protab Chunder 
Surma, ILR 7 Cal. 560; Ram Singh v. Deputy Commissioner of Bara 
Banki, ILR 17 Cal. 444; Lachhmi Sewak Sahu v. Ram Rup Sahu 
and Others, AIR 1944 P.C. 24; Somasundarum Chetty v. Vadivelu 
Pillai, ILR. 31 Mad. 531; Eshan Chunder Singh v. Shama Chunder, 
11 M.I.A; Nepen Bala Debi v. Siti Kanta Banerji, 8 IC 41; Shiro 
Kumari Debi v. Gobind Shaw Tanti, ILR 2 Cal. 418 – referred to.
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
115
Kishundeo Rout & Ors. v. Govind Rao & Ors.
List of Keywords
Plea of adverse possession; Plea of adverse possession raised/
taken for the first time in appeal; Adverse possession plea not raised 
in pleadings; First Appellate Court accepted the plea of adverse 
possession; Plea of adverse possession must be laid in the pleadings; 
First Appeal under Section 96, CPC; Plea of adverse possession is 
based on facts; Adverse possession is a question of fact; Questions 
of fact; Question of law; Mixed question of law and facts; Principle of 
secundum allegata et probata; Pleadings; Rule of pleadings.
Case Arising From
EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Special Leave 
Petition (Civil) No. 22070 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 28.02.2025 of the High Court 
of Jharkhand at Ranchi in SA No. 151 of 2022
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Petitioners:
Shekhar Prit Jha, Ms. Tamanna Swami, Anurag Bansal.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
J.B. Pardiwala, J.
1.	
Delay condoned.
2.	
This petition arises from the judgment and order passed by the High 
Court of Jharkhand dated 28.02.2025 in Second Appeal No. 151 of 
2022 by which the Second Appeal filed by the respondents herein 
(original defendants) came to be allowed thereby set asiding the 
judgment and order passed by the First Appellate Court, i.e., District 
Judge II, Deoghar in Civil Appeal No. 64 of 2018 preferred by the 
petitioners herein (original plaintiffs)against the judgment and decree 
passed by the Civil Judge (Sr Div) IV, Deoghar in Title Suit No. 35 
of 1999 dated 18.08.2018.
3.	
For the sake of convenience, the petitioners shall hereinafter be 
referred to as the plaintiffs and the respondents herein shall hereinafter 
be referred to as the defendants.
116
Supreme Court Reports
4.	
The plaintiffs instituted Title Suit No. 35 of 1999 in the Court of the 
Civil Judge, Deoghar and prayed for the following reliefs: 
“That under the above facts and circumstances the plaintiff 
prays for following relief for a decree declaring that the 
Sale deed bearing no. 256 is bogus, in operative and as 
such fit to be cancelled. As such fit to be cancelled, And 
for confirmation of possession. 
In the event of this dispossession pending the suit then 
for recovery of possession.
(ii) for permanent injunction restraining the defendant from 
claiming herself as the owner of the suit property on the 
basis of the forged and fabricated sale deed.
(iii) for the cost of the suit.
(iv) for any other relief or reliefs which the plaintiff may be 
deemed entitled to.”
5.	
In the Title Suit referred to above the trial court framed the following 
issues: 
I. Is the suit, as framed, maintainable? 
II. Is the suit barred by limitation? 
III. Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of the parties? 
IV. Whether the sale deed dated 03.02.1997, vide no. 256, 
executed by Sudama Devi, is illegal and without valuable 
consideration? 
V. Whether the sale deed dated 03.02.1997 was managed 
by playing fraud/misrepresentation and undue influence 
upon Sudama Devi? 
VI. Whether Sudama Devi did not pass her right., title and 
interest in the suit property to the defendant? 
VII. Whether the possession of suit property was not given 
to the defendant after the execution of alleged sale deed 
dated 03.02.1997?
VIII. Is the plaintiff entitled for reliefs as claimed?
X. Whether there is any cause of action for filing the suit ?
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
117
Kishundeo Rout & Ors. v. Govind Rao & Ors.
6.	
The suit ultimately came to be dismissed vide the judgment and 
decree dated 18.08.2018 while answering the issue nos. (i), (ii), (iii) 
and (ix), the trial court recorded the following findings: 
“9. As per above discussion, I have already found that 
plaintiffs have not succeeded to prove their case that sale 
deed no. 256 dated 03.02.1997 was managed by playing 
fraud, misrepresentation and due influence upon Sudama 
Devi and also failed to prove that the possession of suit 
property was not given to the defendant after execution 
of alleged sale deed and as such the suit filed by the 
plaintiffs against the defendant is not maintainable in its 
present form and there is no valid cause of action for the 
present suit. Hence, the aforesaid issues are also decided 
against the plaintiffs. Therefore, it is, hereby.”
7.	
The plaintiffs being dissatisfied with the judgment and decree passed 
by the trial court dismissing the suit preferred First Appeal in the court 
of the District Judge, Deoghar being the Civil Appeal No. 64 of 2018.
8.	
The First Appeal came to be allowed, and the suit instituted by the 
plaintiffs came to be decreed. While allowing the First Appeal, the 
First Appellate Court recorded the following findings: 
“7.4 During the course of argument this court has made 
a query to the Ld. Counsel for the respondents as to 
whether after dispossession his client/s came in re-
possession of the suit property, to which there was no 
satisfactory reply. The counsel verbally submitted that 
his clients were temporary dispossessed for a day or two 
and there after they regained the possession of the suit 
property. What is evident from W.S is that dispossession 
from suit property by the plaintiff came to the knowledge 
of the defendants on 06.07.2000 or 07.07.2000 and the 
W.S was filed exactly 11 days after that, and in the said 
W.S there is mention of dispossession of the defendants. 
Further from the date of evidences of DW-1 and DW-2 it 
has come out that evidence of DW-1 was tendered in the 
court on 29.04.2011 and his cross-examination was finally 
completed on 30.06.2011. Further the evidence of DW-2 
was tendered in the court on 06.05.2011 and she was 
cross-examined on 05.08.2011, 29.08.2011, 8.11.2011 and 
118
Supreme Court Reports
finally it was completed on 09.02.2012. Further additional 
evidence of DW-2 was file do 16.04.2015 and her cross-
examination was completed on 05.06.2015. 
7.5 Further from the appreciation of affidavit and 
corresponding crossexaminations, this court could not 
find out a single instance wherein the defendants have 
averred that they have regained their lost possession of 
the suit property mentioned in schedule B. Rather it is an 
admitted fact that defendant has lost possession of suit 
property on 07.07.2000.
7.6 what is astonishing to see is that neither a separate 
suit to reclaim the lost possession of suit property is filed 
by the defendants nor any counter claim to reclaim the 
lost possession is filed in their W.S. This means that the 
defendants have not claimed their lost possession of the 
suit property since 07.07.2000. Rather the information 
petition was filed in the court in that regard and same is 
exhibited by them as Exhibit-E. Further as per article 65 of 
the schedule in Limitation Act, 1963, the period of limitation 
as provided by statute for filing of suit for possession of 
immovable property or any interest therein based on title 
is 12 years, from the date when the possession of the 
plaintiff becomes adverse to the defendant. Further from 
the conjoint reading of section-3 R/w 27 of the Limitation 
Act, the right and remedy both are extinguished on the 
expiry of period of limitation as provided by the statute. 
7.7 Since appeal is continuation of the suit, the Court while 
sitting under appeal can make additional issues from the 
material on record, in order to adjudicate the matter finally 
and also to avoid multiplicity of proceedings between 
the parties. Therefore this court is making an additional 
issue and adjudicating it without taking further evidence 
as everything is admitted in the record of the trial court. 
The additional issue is “whether the possession of the 
plaintiff became adverse to the defendants despite the 
facts that defendants have registered sale deed in their 
favour and whether such adverse possession has made 
the defendant herein remedy-less to oust plaintiffs from 
the suit property ?” 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
119
Kishundeo Rout & Ors. v. Govind Rao & Ors.
7.8 Further no evidence is required to adjudicate the 
additional issue, because everything is available on record, 
Before we proceed further, it is pertinent to quote the law 
laid down by apex court in RAVINDER KAUR GREWAL 
AND OTHERS v/s MANJIT KAUR AND OTHERS AIR 
2019 SC 3827. It was held that “ there is absolutely no 
bar for the perfection of title by way of adverse possession 
whether a person is suing as the plaintiff or being sued as a 
defendant. The statute does not define adverse possession, 
it is common law concept, the period of which has been 
prescribed statutorily under the law of limitation Art. 65 as 
12 years. Law of limitation does not define the concept 
of adverse possession nor anywhere contains a provision 
that the plaintiff cannot sue based on adverse possession. 
It only deals with limitation to sue and extinguishment 
of rights. Once the right is extinguished another person 
acquires perspective right which cannot be defeated by 
reentry by the owner or subsequent acknowledgment of 
his rights. The adverse possession requires all the three 
classic requirements to coexist at the same time, namely, 
nec-vi i.e. adequate in continuity, nec-claim i.e. adequate 
in publicity and nec-precario i.e. adverse to a competitor, 
in denial of title and his knowledge. Visible, notorious 
and peaceful so that if the owner does not take care to 
know notorious facts, knowledge is attributed to him on 
the basis that for due diligence he would have known it.” 
the old concept of the law the adverse possession can 
only be used a shield and not as sword, as be overruled 
by the Hon’ble Court in the aforesaid Judgment. And the 
Appellate court while sitting under appeal has unfettered 
powers under section 107 R/w 96 of the CPC to appreciate 
the entire record on law and facts.
7.9 In the present case, it is an admitted fact by the 
defendants that they are not in possession of the suit 
property since 07.07.2000 and since that day the plaintiff 
have forceful possession against the defendant and which 
is within the knowledge of the defendants. Despite having 
title documents of the property no efforts were made by 
them to evict the trespassers/plaintiff and reclaim the lost 
120
Supreme Court Reports
possession. Even if it is presumed that the suit is dismissed 
against the plaintiff’s and sale deed which is sought to be 
declared void is held valid and legal, then also it would 
not make any difference because the defendants have 
lost their right as well remedy to get evicted the plaintiffs 
and reclaim possession of the property, even on basis of 
title. Merely holding a sale deed would not do anything in 
their favour. Neither any separate suit is filed to reclaim 
the possession nor any counter claim in the present suit 
is alleged to reclaim the lost possession and it cannot 
be said that defendants were not aware of the illegal-
adverse possession of the plaintiff. Therefore, plaintiffs 
adverse possession ripened against the defendants. To 
avoid multiplicity of proceedings this court is proceeding 
thereunder.
7.10 Further, in the present case: the Original plaintiff 
who has claimed that she did not receive even a single 
farthing has expired during the pendency of the suit. 
She did not come as plaintiff witness and except her no 
one would have rightly deposed and substantiated as 
to whether she received sale consideration or not. And 
had she been alive, the defendant would have got the 
chance to cross-examine her. In the present case, the 
scenario is bit different. The original plaintiff could not give 
her evidence and as such that could not be rebutted by 
defendant. Whatever evidence the plaintiff gave can only 
be hearsay evidence, and as such the same fall short 
to qualify as direct evidence. Further, the documentary 
evidence of defendants superseded the oral evidence 
advanced by plaintiffs in all respects. Therefore this court 
declares the sale deed of the plaintiff as valid document 
and also the transactions done between the parties. BE 
THAT IT MAY BE SO; as discussed earlier the adverse 
possession of the plaintiffs have already ripened against 
the defendants in year 2012, only w.r.t to property which 
is alleged to be forcefully taken by them and not against 
the other properties. As per settled law, such adverse 
possession in light of aforesaid Judgment has given rights 
to the original plaintiff’s (through her heir) to retain such 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
121
Kishundeo Rout & Ors. v. Govind Rao & Ors.
property (on which there is adverse possession) in their 
own name.
7.11 Accordingly, the suit of the plaintiff is decreed in their 
favor only for the suit property mentioned in schedule B of 
the plaint. Further for properties mentioned in Schedule A 
of the plaintiff, it was alleged that those properties were 
already sold by the plaintiff to some other persons and 
despite that those persons being necessary parties were 
not made parties to the suit by the plaintiff or by the 
defendants, therefore suit of the plaintiff can be decreed 
only with respect to schedule B property. For rest of 
the properties mentioned in other schedules the suit is 
dismissed on merits, for want of necessary parties. 
8. There shall be no order as to costs, parties to bear 
their own costs. Office to call for Sherestadar report for 
deficit court fee, if any and then after compliance, Office 
to make Decree and file be consigned to records after 
due compliance. 
9. Therefore, the suit is decreed in favour of the plaintiffs 
with respect to Schedule B property only and this court 
holds the plaintiffs to be the exclusive owners thereof. 
Accordingly, this Court sets aside the impugned Judgment 
dated 18.08.2018 passed by the Ld. Court below and to 
this extent, this Civil Appeal is Allowed. 
10. All the pending applications, if any, are also hereby 
disposed off. 
11. O/c to draw decree sheet accordingly and consign 
the file to records as per rules and send the original LCR 
along with documents to the concerned court as per rules.”
9.	
Thus, the First Appellate Court accepted the plea of adverse 
possession put up by the plaintiffs and decreed the suit.
10.	 The original defendants being dissatisfied with the judgment and 
order passed by the First Appellate Court preferred Second Appeal 
in the High Court.
11.	 The High Court formulated two substantial questions of law for its 
consideration: 
122
Supreme Court Reports
“(i) Whether the learned lower Appellate Court was justified 
in framing additional issue of adverse possession in an 
appeal filed by the plaintiffs although the plaintiffs never 
pleaded any case of, adverse possession in the plaint? 
(ii) Whether the learned lower appellate court after Framing 
the additional issue of adverse possession could decide 
the case without taking further evidence in connection with 
the additional issue of adverse possession?” 
12.	 The High Court allowed the Second Appeal recording the following 
findings: 
“24. This Court is of the considered view that the condition 
precedent to seek a relief of declaration of adverse 
possession is perfection of title by adverse possession 
prior to filing of the suit and it has been held that once 
such right, title or interest is acquired, it can be used as a 
sword by the plaintiff as well as a shield by the defendant 
within ken of Article 65 of the Act and any person who has 
perfected title by way of adverse possession, can file a 
suit for restoration of possession in case of dispossession. 
There is no concept of perfection of title by adverse 
possession during the pendency of the suit between the 
parties. As held above, adverse possession cannot be 
decreed on a title which is not pleaded. 
25. Upon perusal of the entire plaint and also the relief, 
this Court finds that there was no foundational pleading 
with regard to claim of title by adverse possession of the 
property. Rather, essentially the suit was filed seeking a 
declaration of the sale deed executed by the plaintiffs in 
favour of the defendant as bogus, inoperative and seeking 
a permanent injunction upon the defendant from claiming 
herself to be owner of the suit property. At the time of 
filing of the suit in the year 1999, the plaintiffs claimed 
to be in possession of the property. The defendant had 
filed a written statement stating that the defendant was 
dispossessed from the property since 07.07.2000, that is, 
during the pendency of the suit. 
26. This Court finds that since there was no foundational 
pleading in connection with claim of adverse possession in 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
123
Kishundeo Rout & Ors. v. Govind Rao & Ors.
the plaint or in the written statement, there was no occasion 
for the learned 1st appellate court to frame an issue of 
adverse possession. The learned 1st Appellate Court 
recorded that in the written statement, the defendant had 
stated that they were dispossessed from the property since 
07.07.2000. The learned Appellate Court further recorded 
that in spite of the defendant having been dispossessed 
from the property since 07.07.2000 did not take any effort 
to recover the property from the plaintiffs and accordingly 
held that the adverse possession of the plaintiffs against 
the defendant ripened in the year 2012, that is during the 
pendency of the suit.
27. There are concurrent findings with regard to the 
legality and validity of the sale deed bearing no.256 dated 
03.02.1997 executed by the original plaintiff in favour of 
the original defendant. However, the learned appellate 
court framed additional issues on the point of adverse 
possession of the plaintiffs and held that the adverse 
possession matured in favour of the plaintiffs in the year 
2012 and period commenced from the year 2000 when 
the defendant was dispossessed.
28. This Court finds that framing of an issue of adverse 
possession by the 1st appellate court was absolutely 
beyond the pleadings of the parties and the appellate 
court was not at all justified in holding that adverse 
possession matured in favour of the plaintiffs in the year 
2012 during the pendency of the suit which was filed in 
the year 1999. 
29. This Court is of the considered view that considering 
the aforesaid facts and circumstances, framing of an issue 
of adverse possession at the first appellate stage and 
recording a finding that the adverse possession matured 
during the pendency of the suit, is ex facie perverse and 
is beyond the scope of the suit and beyond the pleading 
in the suit. This Court is of the considered view that if plea 
of adverse possession is to be considered and decided in 
favour of the plaintiff, then the foundational pleading for 
claiming adverse possession has to be there in the plaint 
itself, which is totally absent in the present case.
124
Supreme Court Reports
30. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the 
first substantial question of law is decided in favour of the 
appellants and against the respondents.
31. In view of the findings with regard to the 1st substantial 
question of law, there is no question of taking any further 
evidence on the point of adverse possession framed for the 
first time by the learned 1st appellate court. Consequently, 
the 2nd substantial question of law is also answered 
against the appellants and in favour of the respondents. 
32. Both the substantial questions of law having been 
answered in favour of the appellants, this appeal is allowed. 
Accordingly, the judgement and decree passed by the 
learned 1st appellate court is set aside and consequently, 
the judgement and decree passed by learned Trial Court 
is affirmed.”
13.	 Thus, the High Court while allowing the Second Appeal took the 
view that there was no foundational pleading led by the plaintiffs in 
connection with the claim of adverse possession in the plaint or in the 
written statement and there was no occasion for the First Appellate 
Court to frame an issue of adverse possession.
14.	 The High Court also recorded a finding that the Original suit was 
to declare the sale deed sham and bogus, which the plaintiffs were 
unable to establish and accordingly, the suit was dismissed. 
15.	 In the last, the High Court recorded a finding that as regards the 
legality and validity of the sale deed bearing no. 256 of 03.02.1997 
executed by the original plaintiff in favour of the original defendant 
is concerned, the First Appellate Court concurred with the findings 
recorded by the trial court.
16.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the petitioners-original 
plaintiffs are here before this Court with the present petition.
ANALYSIS:-
17.	 Heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners.
18.	 We had the benefit of looking into few very old erudite judgments on 
the pivotal issue involved in the present litigation. One such judgment 
is a full Bench decision rendered by the Punjab High Court in the 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
125
Kishundeo Rout & Ors. v. Govind Rao & Ors.
case of Ganda Singh and Ors. v. Ram Narain Singh reported in ILR 
(1959) 1 P&H 385. 
19.	 It is a settled position of law that the foundation for the plea of adverse 
possession must be laid in the pleadings and then an issue must 
be framed and tried. A plea not properly raised in the pleadings or 
in issues at the stage of trial would not be permitted to be raised 
for the first time at the stage of First Appeal under Section 96 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure (CPC).
20.	 The plea of adverse possession is not always a legal plea. Indeed, 
it is always based on facts which must be asserted and proved. A 
person who claims adverse possession must show on what date he 
came into possession, what was the nature of his possession, whether 
the factum of his possession was known to the legal claimants and 
how long his possession continued. He must also show whether 
his possession was open and undisturbed. These are all questions 
of fact and unless they are asserted and proved, a plea of adverse 
possession cannot be inferred from them. Therefore, in normal cases 
an appellate Court will not allow the plea of adverse possession 
to be raised before it. There is no doubt that in some cases, the 
plea will be allowed for the reason that in some form or the other 
allegation upon which it can be raised might have been made at the 
time and the facts necessary to prove the plea were brought before 
the court and proved. Such a case is the one of which the decision 
is reported in Municipal Board, Etawah v. Mt. Ram Sri and another 
reported in A.I.R. 1931 All. 670. In that case the plaintiffs based their 
suit on title extending over a period of thirty years. ‘‘The plaintiffs” 
case was that plaintiff 1 was the owner of the land and she had on 
that plot four small shops fetching a rent of about Rs. 80 a month. 
Plaintiff 2 is her lessee. The shops were burnt down in June, 1926 
and the land was laid vacant. The plaintiffs made an application to 
the Municipal Board for permission to build again on the land, but this 
permission was refused on 27th August, 1926, on the ground that 
the Municipal Board was the owner of the land and not the plaintiffs.” 
The learned Judges of the Allahabad High Court held that a plea 
of adverse possession extending over a period of thirty years could 
be read into this claim and therefore although it was not specifically 
raised in the plaint yet it could be raised at a later stage. In other 
words, what they held was that the plea of adverse possession was 
included in the plea of title. In coming to this conclusion the learned 
126
Supreme Court Reports
Judges no doubt took notice of the fact that the plaintiffs had clearly 
stated that actual physical possession of the property in dispute was 
with them. [See: Ganda Singh (supra)]
21.	 A case of another type in which the plea of adverse possession 
was not allowed to be raised is Krishna Churn Baisack and others 
v. Protab Chunder Surma reported in I.L.R. 7 Cal. 560. In that 
case no plea of adverse possession for a period of twelve years 
was made in the plaint, but the plea was raised in the trial Court 
itself. The District Judge, however, took the view that the plaintiffs 
ought not be allowed to succeed on the plea of adverse possession 
because it had not been set out with sufficient distinctness in the 
plaint. With this view the learned Judges of the Calcutta High 
Court agreed. They based their decision on the ground that all the 
facts necessary for proving this plea had not been alleged before 
the Court. In that case the plaintiffs had not been in continued 
possession for a period of twelve years and they sought to tack 
on the previous possession of another. Therefore, it is clear that 
in disallowing the plea of adverse possession to be raised before 
them the learned Judges were actuated by the fact that fresh 
material would have to be brought before the Court in the form 
of allegations and counter-allegations before the plea of adverse 
possession could be held to be proved. They remanded that case 
for fresh decision on another issue. 
22.	 In Ram Singh v. Deputy Commissioner of Bara Banki reported in 
I.L.R. 17 Cal. 444, the plea of adverse possession was raised for 
the first time in appeal before the Privy Council. Their Lordships 
held that since there was no allegation of adverse possession in 
the plaint and no issue raised as to it before the Court below they 
could not entertain the plea.
23.	 Lachhmi Sewak Sahu v. Ram Rup Sahu and others reported in A.I.R. 
1944 P.C. 24 is another case in which the same principle was laid 
down. Also see Somasundarum Chetty v. Vadivelu Pillai reported in 
I.L.R. 31 Mad. 531. 
24.	 It is important to remember that the basic rule of law of pleadings 
is, that a party can only succeed according to what he has alleged 
and proved, otherwise, on the principle of secundum allegata et 
probata, a party is not allowed to succeed, where he has not set 
up the case which he wants to substantiate. In the words of Lord 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
127
Kishundeo Rout & Ors. v. Govind Rao & Ors.
Westbury in Eshan Chunder Singh v. Shama Chunder reported 
in 11 M.I.A.: —
“..........................the determination in a case should be 
founded upon the case either to be found in the pleadings 
as involved in or consistent with the case thereby 
made....................... It will introduce the greatest amount of 
uncertainty into judicial proceedings, if final determination 
of causes, is to be founded upon inferences, at variance 
with the case that the plaintiff has pleaded.................. and 
is not taken to prove...................... they desire to have 
the rule observed that the state of fact and the equities 
and ground of relief originally alleged and pleaded by the 
plaintiff, shall not be departed from.”
(emphasis supplied)
25.	 This rule that pleadings and proof must correspond, rests upon 
the principle that no party should be prejudiced by being taken by 
surprise by varying the case as originally Set up. In the words of 
Mahajan, J., in Trojan and Co., Ltd. v. RM. N. N. Nagappa Chettier 
reported in 1953 S.C.R. 789 (806). “It is well settled that decision 
of a case cannot be based on grounds outside the pleadings of the 
parties and it is a case pleaded that has to be found.”
26.	 The correct test as to when a plea of adverse possession, when not 
taken in the plaint, can be raised later on in appeal, was laid down 
by Calcutta High Court in Nepen Bala Debi v. Siti Kanta Banerji 
reported in 8 I.C. 41 in the following words:
“Where no case of acquisition of title by adverse possession 
is made in the plaint, nor is the question raised directly or 
indirectly in any of the issues, the plaintiff ought not to be 
allowed to succeed upon such a case. On the other hand, 
as pointed out by this court in the case of Lilabati Misrain v. 
Bishun Chobey, when the question reduces itself to one 
of law, upon facts admitted or proved beyond controversy, 
it is not only competent to the Court, but expedient in 
the interest of justice to entertain the plea of adverse 
possession, if such a case arises on the facts stated in 
the plaint and the defendant is not taken by surprise. The 
true test, therefore, to be applied to determine whether the 
128
Supreme Court Reports
plea of title by adverse possession should be allowed to 
be urged though not explicitly raised in the plaint, is, how 
far the defendant is likely to be prejudiced if the point is 
permitted to be taken.”
(emphasis supplied)
27.	 Ordinarily, the question of adverse possession is one of fact, resting 
upon proof of numerous circumstances which go to establish the 
several elements, indicating adverse character of the possession. 
In certain cases, it may be a question of law, or, a mixed question 
of law and facts as, where the decision rests upon inferences to be 
drawn from facts which are admitted or established.
28.	 The determination of adverse possession depends upon sifting of 
facts and circumstances, indicative of adverse possession, and 
then, upon testing of the evidence in the light of the law applicable. 
The Appellate Court may allow the setting up of the plea of adverse 
possession for the first time in appeal provided, the facts on the record 
are sufficient to support it, and the opposite party is not taken by 
surprise, but otherwise, a declaration of title by adverse possession 
will not be given where the claim is not set out distinctly in the 
pleadings or in issues. In Shiro Kumari Debi v. Gobind Shaw Tanti 
reported in I.L.R. 2 Cal. 418, Markby J., observed at page 242, that 
where the question of 12 years’ possession had not been properly 
raised either in the plaint or in the issues, and the defendant had 
no proper notice that such a point was going to be raised, it was 
not open to the lower appellate Court to declare in plaintiff’s favour 
on the strength of the title which had not been alleged. Plaintiff’s 
suit was dismissed.
29.	 In the case at hand if plea of adverse possession had been taken 
in the plaint, and if that plea had been traversed by the defendants 
and then proper issues framed, a heavy burden would have laid on 
the plaintiffs to lead evidence in support of their hostile claim and a 
corresponding opportunity of rebuttal would have been given by law 
to the defendants. In this case it is inconceivable that the question of 
adverse possession can become the subject- matter of adjudication 
on this record in the absence of proper plea, issue or proof.
30.	 The above discussion leads us to the only conclusion, and that is, 
that, unless the plea of adverse possession has been specifically 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
129
Kishundeo Rout & Ors. v. Govind Rao & Ors.
raised in the pleadings, put in issue, and then cogent and convincing 
evidence is led on a multitude of points, and an opportunity to refute 
the case is made out by the plaintiff, and availed of by the defendant, 
the plea of adverse possession cannot be allowed to be flung as a 
surprise, on an unsuspecting defendant, for the first time in appeal.
31.	 In the result, this petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
32.	 Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Petition dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey