[2025] 1 S.C.R. 651 : 2025 INSC 50
The State of Punjab 
v. 
Hari Kesh
(Criminal Appeal No. 104 of 2025)
07 January 2025
[Bela M. Trivedi and Prasanna B. Varale, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court was justified in quashing the Sanction 
Order and setting aside the proceedings arising therefrom, thereby 
allowing the petition filed by the accused.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – Whether High Court was 
correct in quashing the sanction order when the trial had 
already commenced and the prosecution had already examined 
seven witnesses – Correctness:
Held: The petition for quashing of Sanction Order was filed 
by the respondent after the trial court framed the charge and 
commenced the trial, rather after the prosecution examined five 
witnesses – While deciding the issue, The Hon’ble Supreme Court 
placed heavy reliance on State of Karnataka, Lokayukta Police 
Versus S. Subbegowda (2023 SCC Online SC 911), where the 
Hon’ble Apex Court dealt with ss.19(3) and 19(4) of Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988 and held, sanction order passed by special 
judge shall not be interfered with, by the Court in appeal or 
revision on the ground of the absence of, or any error, omission 
or irregularity in the sanction, unless the said Court in appeal or 
revision finds that failure of justice has occurred while passing 
impugned order — The High Court failed to record any opinion 
as to how a failure of justice had in fact on account of error if 
any, occurred in granting the sanction by the authority – As per 
the Explanation to sub-section (4), of Section 19, error includes 
“competency of the authority to grant Sanction” – The Sanction, 
in question, has been granted by the competent authority or not, 
would be a matter of evidence to be proved by the prosecution 
during the course of trial – The High Court committed gross error 
in quashing the Sanction Order and the consequent proceedings 
652
Supreme Court Reports
as the High Court failed to record any opinion as to how a failure 
of justice had occasioned, thus the order passed by High Court 
is set aside. [Paras 7, 8, 9]
Case Law Cited
State of Karnataka, Lokayukta Police v. S. Subbegowda [2023] 11 
SCR 19 : 2023 SCC Online SC 911 – relied upon.
List of Acts
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988; Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973.
List of Keywords
Grant of Sanction under Prevention of Corruption Act; Competency 
to grant Sanction; Failure of justice.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
104 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.05.2019 of the High  
Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in CRM-M No. 11994 
of 2019
Appearances for Parties
Vivek Jain, D.A.G., Karan Sharma, Advs. for the Appellant.
Vivek Gupta, Ankit Verma, Advs. for the Respondent.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeal, filed by the appellant-State of Punjab, is 
directed against the impugned judgment and order dated 20.05.2019, 
passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in 
CRM-M No. 11994 of 2019 (O&M), whereby the said petition, filed 
by the respondent-accused seeking quashing of Sanction Order 
dated 19.11.2018, in the case arising out of F.I.R. No. 02 dated 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
653
The State of Punjab v. Hari Kesh
10.01.2024, registered at Police Station-Vigilance Bureau, Patiala 
Range, Patiala for the offence punishable under Sections 7 and 
13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (for short “the Act”), 
has been allowed and the consequent proceedings arising therefrom 
have been set aside.
3.	
Heard learned counsels for the parties.
4.	
It is sought to be submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant-
State of Punjab that the High Court had passed the impugned 
order when the trial had already commenced and the prosecution 
had already examined seven witnesses. Learned counsel places 
heavy reliance on the decision of this Court in the case of State of 
Karnataka, Lokayukta Police Versus S. Subbegowda (2023 SCC 
Online SC 911), to submit that the High Court has committed an error 
in quashing the Sanction Order and setting aside the proceedings 
arising therefrom when the trial has already commenced.
5.	
However, the learned counsel for the respondent-accused submits that 
the High Court has rightly quashed the proceedings considering the 
fact that earlier, Sanction sought was not granted by the competent 
authority and now, the impugned Sanction Order has been passed by 
an officer who was not competent to grant the Sanction to prosecute 
the respondent-accused.
6.	
The short question that arises for determination of this Court is 
whether the High Court could have set aside the impugned Sanction 
Order and the proceedings arising therefrom, more particularly, when 
the trial had already commenced and the prosecution had examined 
seven witnesses.
7.	
In our opinion, the judgment in the case of S. Subbegowda (supra) 
clinches the issue, in which, this Court in the similar facts and 
circumstances, after considering the provisions contained in Section 
19 of the Act, has held as under: -
“11. The combined reading of sub-section (3) and (4) of 
Section 19 makes it clear that notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code, no finding, sentence or order 
passed by the Special Judge shall be reversed or altered 
by a Court in appeal, confirmation or revision on the ground 
of, the absence of, or any error, omission or irregularity in 
654
Supreme Court Reports
the sanction required under sub-section (1), unless in the 
opinion of the Court, a failure of justice has in fact been 
occasioned thereby. sub-section (4) further postulates that 
in determining under subsection (3) whether the absence 
of, or any error, omission or irregularity in the sanction 
has occasioned, or resulted in failure of justice, the Court 
shall have regard to the fact whether the objection could 
and should have been raised at an earlier stage in the 
proceedings. The explanation to sub-section (4) further 
provides that for the purpose of Section 19, error includes 
“competency of the authority to grant sanction”. Thus, it 
is clear from the language employed in sub-section (3) 
of Section 19 that the said sub-section has application to 
the proceedings before the Court in appeal, confirmation 
or revision, and not to the proceedings before the Special 
Judge. The said sub-section (3) clearly forbids the court 
in appeal, confirmation or revision, the interference with 
the order passed by the Special Judge on the ground that 
the sanction was bad, save and except in cases where 
the appellate or revisional court finds that the failure of 
justice had occurred by such invalidity.”
12. & 13……………………………
14. In the instant case, the Special Judge proceeded with 
the trial, on the second application for discharge filed by 
the respondent having not been pressed for by him. The 
Special Judge, while dismissing the third application filed 
by the respondent seeking discharge after examination 
of 17 witnesses by the prosecution, specifically held that 
the sanction accorded by the government which was a 
superior authority to the Karnataka Water Supply Board, 
of which the respondent was an employee, was proper 
and valid. Such findings recorded by the Special Judge 
could not have been and should not have been reversed 
or altered by the High Court in the petition filed by the 
respondent challenging the said order of the Special Judge, 
in view of the specific bar contained in sub-section (3) of 
Section 19, and that too without recording any opinion 
as to how a failure of justice had in fact been occasioned 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
655
The State of Punjab v. Hari Kesh
to the respondent-accused as contemplated in the said 
sub-section (3). As a matter of fact, neither the respondent 
had pleaded nor the High Court opined whether any failure 
of justice had occasioned to the respondent, on account 
of error if any, occurred in granting the sanction by the 
authority.
8.	
In the instant case, it appears that the petition for quashing of Sanction 
Order was filed by the respondent after the trial court framed the 
charge and commenced the trial, rather after the prosecution examined 
five witnesses. It is pertinent to note that whether the Sanction has 
been granted by the competent authority or not, would be a matter of 
evidence. Further, as per the Explanation to sub-section (4), for the 
purpose of Section 19, error includes “competency of the authority 
to grant Sanction.” Therefore, in view of the settled legal position, 
the High Court should not have quashed the Sanction Order and the 
consequent proceedings, unless it was satisfied that the failure of 
justice had occurred by such error or irregularity or invalidity. There 
is not a whisper in the impugned order about any failure of justice 
having occurred on account of the impugned Sanction Order. The 
High Court also should not have entertained the petition for quashing 
the Sanction Order when the prosecution had already examined 
seven witnesses.
9.	
In that view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the High Court 
has committed gross error in quashing the Sanction Order and the 
consequent proceedings vide the impugned order.
10.	 The impugned judgment and order dated 20.05.2019, passed by the 
High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in CRM-M No. 
11994 of 2019 (O&M), is therefore set aside. The proceedings arising 
out of the case being PC-15/2018, are restored on file before the 
Special Court-Sangrur and they shall be proceeded further from the 
stage at which the proceedings were stopped, in accordance with law.
11.	 As stated earlier, whether the Sanction Order was passed by the 
competent authority or not, would be a matter of evidence to be 
proved by the prosecution during the course of trial.
12.	 We clarify that we have not expressed any opinion on the merits of 
the case and the respondent-accused shall be at liberty to raise all 
656
Supreme Court Reports
contentions as may be legally permissible with regard to Sanction 
during the course of the trial.
13.	 The Appeal is allowed accordingly. 
14.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand closed.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Gaurav Upadhyay, Hony. Associate Editor 
(Verified by: Liz Mathew, Sr. Adv.)