[2025] 6 S.C.R. 513 : 2025 INSC 702
Ramkirat Munilal Goud 
v. 
State of Maharashtra Etc.
(Criminal Appeal No(s). 1954-1955 of 2022)
07 May 2025
[Vikram Nath, Sanjay Karol and Sandeep Mehta,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to the correctness of the order passed by the High 
Court upholding the conviction and death sentence of the appellant 
for causing rape and murder of a child aged 3 years and 9 months.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.302, 363, 376(2), 201 – Rape and murder 
of a child – Prosecution case that gruesome rape and murder 
of a child at the tender age of 3 years and 9 months – Dead 
body of child recovered from pond located at a distance of one 
kilometer from appellant’s house – Prosecution case based 
on circumstantial evidence-last seen together circumstance, 
extra-judicial confession, and FSL report regarding the soil 
found stuck in the shoes of the appellant, matching with the 
soil of the pond where the child’s dead body found – Trial 
court convicted the appellant and sentenced him to death – 
High Court upheld the order – Correctness:
Held: Flawed and tainted investigation eventually led to the 
failure of the prosecution case – Evidence of the witnesses of last 
seen circumstance vacillating, shaky and tainted with wholesale 
improvements, and thus, unworthy of credence – Conduct of the 
witnesses of the last seen circumstance in failing to timely step 
forward to make a disclosure to the Investigating Officer that they 
had seen the appellant and the child victim together on the date 
of the incident in spite of the fact that the police officers were 
regularly visiting the area, clearly indicates that the witnesses 
were untrustworthy and were created by the investigation agency 
for ulterior motive – Investigating Officer made no effort to record 
the statements of the witnesses of last seen circumstance in the 
spot panchnama, at the earliest available opportunity, rather did not 
* Author
514
Supreme Court Reports
record their statements at all, and the witnesses were examined for 
the first time three days later by the second Investigating Officer, 
which omission is vital and indicative of gross negligence on the part 
of the Investigation Officer – Evidence of extra-judicial confession 
as deposed by one prosecution witness also unacceptable because 
the said witness too did not step forward to inform the police 
regarding the fact of the so called extrajudicial confession made 
by the appellant before him, in spite of being aware that the police 
was searching for the child – FSL report regarding the similarity 
of soil samples also inconsequential – Prosecution did not to 
place on record the reports pertaining to the comparison of the 
samples taken from the other watchmen – Thus, the prosecution 
withheld important evidence thereby, compelling the court to draw 
adverse inference against the prosecution – Despite there being 
any reliable evidence, the appellant was convicted and sentenced 
by the courts below and has suffered incarceration for 12 years of 
which 6 years were under the threat of death penalty – Findings 
recorded in the impugned judgments holding the appellant guilty, 
based on conjectures and surmises and thus, both the judgments 
and the order of sentence unsustainable and quashed and set 
aside. [Paras 75-79].
Case Law Cited
Sharad Birdhichand Sharda v. State of Maharashtra [1985] 1 SCR 
88 : (1984) 4 SCC 116 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; Protection of Children from 
Sexual Offences Act, 2013.
List of Keywords
Murder; Rape; Child victim; Shabby and perfunctory investigation; 
Inherent improbability in prosecution case; Test identification; 
Damocles sword of impending death penalty; Ante mortem injuries; 
DNA profiling; Links of circumstantial evidence; Death sentence; 
Unimpeachable evidence; Circumstantial evidence; Forcible 
sexual assault; Blind murder; Reliable witness; Last seen together; 
Intensive combing operations; Significant loophole and grave 
shortcoming of prosecution case; Flawed and tainted investigation; 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
515
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
Extra-judicial confession; Blood stained soil; Foundation of arrest 
lacking; Inconsequential recoveries; FSL report; Physio-chemical 
characteristics; Spectro-chemical composition; Rape and murder 
of a child aged 3 years and 9 months; Evidence of the witnesses 
of last seen circumstance; Conduct of the witnesses; Investigating 
Officer; Death penalty.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No(s). 
1954-1955 of 2022
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.11.2021 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in CC No. 1 and CRA No. 661 of 2019
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
A Raghenth Basant, Sr. Adv., Ms. Fauzia Shakil, Ms. Aathma 
Sudhir Kumar, Ms. Shreya Rastogi, Ms. Pratiksha Basarkar,  
Ms. Kaushitaki Sharma, Ms. Hima Bhardwaj.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Ms. Rukhmini Bobde, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Aaditya Aniruddha 
Pande, Ms. Soumya Priyadarshinee, Vinayak Aren, Amlaan Kumar, 
Jatin Dhamija, Naveen Kumar Bhardwaj.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Mehta, J.
1.	
Heard.
2.	
The instant case is yet another classic example of shabby and 
perfunctory investigation leading to failure of the prosecution case 
involving a gruesome incident of rape and murder of the budding life 
of a tender young girl1 aged about 3 years and 9 months.
3.	
Despite the shabby investigation, the overzealous approach of the 
Courts below, to impart justice, in a sense that someone must be held 
1	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘child’ or ‘child victim’.
516
Supreme Court Reports
responsible for the crime, has led to the conviction of the appellant 
herein2, who was a young man aged about 25 years at the time of 
the incident and has remained incarcerated for more than 12 years 
with the Damocles sword of impending death penalty hanging over 
his head for more than 6 years.
4.	
Succinctly stated, the facts relevant and essential for disposal of the 
appeals may be noted hereinbelow.
5.	
The complainant, Manoj Bhaskar Sadavarte (PW-1)3 a painter by 
profession, used to reside at Old Waghbil Gaon, Banjari Chawl, 
Laxminagar, Thane(W) along with his mother and daughter, i.e., 
the deceased child victim. On 30th September, 2013, at about 10:00 
A.M., the complainant’s mother had gone out of the house to fetch 
water. At about 10:30 A.M., the complainant left his house to attend 
to some work. The child victim was alone in the house when the 
complainant went out. She came out of the house to play with the 
family pet dog. The complainant returned home at about 10:45 A.M. 
and noticed that his daughter and the pet dog were nowhere to be 
seen. Initially, he assumed that his child might have gone out in the 
vicinity to play with the dog and, thus, he set out to look for her in 
areas near his house. However, he could neither locate the child 
victim nor the pet dog. When the complainant’s mother came back 
to the house, he inquired about the whereabouts of the child from 
her, but she too was unaware about the same. Concerned about the 
child’s well-being, he and his mother commenced a frantic search 
for his daughter. 
6.	
The complainant inquired from two persons living in the neighbourhood, 
who told him that they had seen the child playing with the dog. 
Thereafter, he went to the watchmen chawl located near his room, 
where several watchmen used to reside. The pet dog was found in 
the chawl, but his child was nowhere to be seen. The complainant 
got suspicious that some unknown person/s might have kidnapped 
his child. Accordingly, he proceeded to Police Station Kasarvadavali, 
Thane and lodged a complaint regarding his child, having gone 
missing. The police registered an FIR, bearing Crime No. I-306 of 
2	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘accused appellant’.
3	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘complainant’.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
517
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
2013, for the offence punishable under Section 363 of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860.4 Investigation was assigned to the Assistant Police 
Inspector (API) Vikas Sarjerao Lokre (PW-16)5 who prepared the 
spot panchnama6 of the place of the incident on 1st October, 2013. 
The panchnama records the place where the child victim was last 
seen and the place from where she was purportedly kidnapped. The 
panchnama also gives out the names of the persons who had seen 
the child and the dog on 30th September, 2013, in the sequence 
enumerated below:-
Time
Person
Around 10:45 A.M.
Premshankar Jayshankar Gupta
Around 11:00 A.M.
Raju Pukraj Choudhari (Owner of Ashapura 
Grocery Shop)
Around 11:15 A.M.
Jaybhim Channappa Kamble and some 
other people.
Around 12:00 P.M.
Dipendrakumar Dhirendranath Shukla 
(PW-9)
Around 12:15 P.M.
Pradipkumar Ganesh Rawat (PW-14)
The aforesaid panchnama was drawn up on 1st October, 2013 
between 07:30 A.M. to 08:45 A.M. 
7.	
Vikas Sarjerao Lokre (PW-16), the 1st Investigating Officer rounded 
up some 15 to 20 watchmen from the chawl and collected their 
forensic/blood samples. 
8.	
The dead body of the child victim was recovered on 2nd October 
2013, lying in a muddy water pond at a distance of about one 
kilometer from the watchmen chawl and the same was forwarded 
to Civil Hospital, Thane, where the Medical Officer, Dr. Mahendra 
Vithalrao Kendre (PW-10), examined the same and found it to be 
in a highly decomposed condition. Thus, the body was forwarded to 
the J.J. Hospital for an autopsy as no forensic expert was available 
4	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘IPC’.
5	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘1st Investigating Officer (PW-16)’.
6	
Exhibit No. 30.
518
Supreme Court Reports
at the Civil Hospital, Thane. At the J.J. Hospital, the dead body of 
the child victim was subjected to post mortem by a medical board, 
comprising of Dr. Sadanand Sangram Bhise (PW-11), along with Dr. 
N.S. Jagtap and Dr. G.D. Niturkar and the post mortem report7 was 
issued. The post mortem report refers to numerous injuries on the 
external and internal genitalia as well as the anus of the child victim. 
Few contusions were also found over the skull of the child victim. The 
brain had liquified and was in an advanced stage of decomposition. 
The medical board opined that the injuries, mentioned in Column 
No. 17 to 19 of the post mortem report, were ante mortem in nature 
and the head injury was sufficient to cause death in the ordinary 
course of nature.
9.	
On 3rd October, 2013, the investigation was handed over to Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, Mandar Vasant Dharmadhikari (PW-18).8 
10.	 The accused appellant was arrested on 3rd October 2013, vide 
arrest panchnama9 and he was subjected to medical examination. 
The Medical Officer (PW-10) of the Civil Hospital, Thane, found an 
abrasion on the foreskin of the penis of the accused appellant. The 
prosecution has tried to link the said injury with the crime, claiming 
that the injury may have been received when the accused appellant 
had sexually assaulted the child victim. 
11.	 On the pointing out of the accused appellant, the Investigating Officer, 
Mandar Vasant Dharmadhikari (PW-18) claims to have visited room 
No. 2 (place of incident) and room No. 4 of the watchmen chawl, 
in which the accused appellant used to reside. A few articles were 
recovered and seized from room No. 4, to be specific, the lungi, 
baniyan, the watchman’s dress and the shoes of the accused 
appellant. Blood stained soil and blood stained stone slabs were 
recovered from room No. 2.
12.	 As per the prosecution case, the accused appellant confessed 
before the Investigating Officer (PW-18) that he had committed the 
crime with the child victim in the said room. The lungi of the accused 
appellant was allegedly blood-stained, and the shoes had some soil/
7	
Exhibit No. 58.
8	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘2nd Investigating Officer (PW-18)’.
9	
Exh. 82.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
519
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
mud stuck in their sole. The Investigating Officer (PW-18) also claims 
to have collected blood samples of the accused appellant for DNA 
profiling. The forensic science laboratory (FSL) report10 concludes 
that the source of blood on the lungi could not be identified. The DNA 
profiling tests, conducted using the blood of the accused appellant 
and the DNA samples collected from the child’s body, did not lead 
to any conclusive opinion.
13.	 The prosecution’s case was entirely based on three links of 
circumstantial evidence:
(i)	
Last seen together circumstance; 
(ii)	
Extra-judicial confession; and 
(iii)	 FSL report regarding the mud/soil found stuck in the shoes of 
the accused appellant, matching with the soil of the pond where 
the child victim’s dead body was found. 
14.	 The prosecution relied upon the evidence of Dipendrakumar 
Dhirendranath Shukla (PW-9), Pradipkumar Ganesh Rawat (PW-14) 
and Sanjay Ganesh Rawat (PW-15) for proving the purported theory of 
‘last seen together’ and Anil Mahatam Singh (PW-17), the Supervisor, 
under whom the accused appellant was working, for proving the so 
called extra-judicial confession made by the accused appellant. The 
prosecution also relied upon the FSL report11 as per which the soil/
mud stuck in the sole of the accused appellant’s shoes was opined 
to be having characteristics as similar to the soil found near the pond 
from where the child victim’s body was recovered.
15.	 Learned Additional Sessions Judge, Thane12 found the prosecution 
evidence on the aforementioned links of circumstantial evidence to 
be reliable and credible and by placing reliance thereupon, the trial 
Court convicted the accused appellant for the offences punishable 
under Sections 302, 363, 376(2)(i) and 201 of the IPC and Sections 4 
and 8 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2013, 
vide judgment dated 5th March, 2019 and sentenced him vide sentence 
order dated 8th March, 2019 in the terms indicated below: -
10	
Exh. 99.
11	
Exh. 105
12	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘trial Court’.
520
Supreme Court Reports
S. No.
Section
Sentence Awarded
1.
302 of the 
IPC
Sentenced to be Hanged by Neck till Death.
2.
376(2)(i) 
of the IPC
Sentenced to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment 
for Life which shall mean imprisonment for the 
remainder of his natural life and to pay a fine 
of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand Only). 
In case of default in payment of fine, he shall 
suffer Rigorous Imprisonment for one year.
3.
363 of the 
IPC
Sentenced to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment 
of 5 years and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/- 
(Rupees Five Thousand Only). In case of 
default in payment of fine, he shall suffer 
Rigorous Imprisonment for six months.
4.
201 of the 
IPC
Rigorous Imprisonment of 3 years and to pay 
a fine of Rs.5,000/- (Rupees Five Thousand 
Only). In case of default in payment of fine, 
he shall suffer Rigorous Imprisonment for 
six months
All the substantive sentences of imprisonment of the accused shall 
run concurrently. After realization of the fine amount, it shall be given 
to the parents of the deceased girl.
16.	 The appeal13 preferred by the accused appellant and the reference14 
forwarded by the trial Court, were decided by the High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay15 vide judgment dated 25th November, 2021, 
whereby the conviction of the accused appellant and the death 
sentence awarded to him have been confirmed and the appeal 
preferred by the accused appellant has been dismissed. The said 
judgment dated 25th November, 2021, rendered by the High Court 
and along with the judgment dated 5th March, 2019, and the order 
of sentence dated 8th March, 2019, rendered by the trial Court, are 
subject matter of challenge in these appeals by special leave.
13	
Criminal Appeal No. 661 of 2019
14	
Confirmation Case No. 1 of 2019
15	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘High Court’.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
521
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
Submissions on behalf of accused appellant:
17.	 Mr. Raghenth Basant, learned senior counsel representing the 
accused appellant, vehemently and fervently contended that the 
prosecution has failed to prove even one of the three projected 
incriminating circumstances relied upon by it so as to bring home 
the guilt of the accused appellant. The evidence of the witnesses of 
the last seen circumstance is highly vacillating and self-contradicting 
and perfunctory and hence, the same deserves to be discarded in 
toto. All these witnesses were fully aware about the disappearance of 
the child victim on 30th September, 2013, itself when the police came 
to the area and started making enquiries. However, none of them 
stepped forward to inform the 1st Investigating Officer (PW-16) that 
they had seen the child victim and the accused appellant together. 
The statements under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
197316 of these witnesses were recorded by the 2nd Investigating 
Officer (PW-18) as late as on 3rd October, 2013. As per learned senior 
counsel, the conduct of the witnesses, in keeping silent and their 
failure in making a timely disclosure to the 1st Investigating Officer 
(PW-16) about having seen the child victim in the company of the 
accused appellant on the fateful day, i.e., 30th September, 2013, and 
even after the dead body was recovered, i.e., on 2nd October, 2013, 
makes their entire testimony doubtful and unworthy of credence.
18.	 Learned senior counsel further submitted that, if at all, the witnesses 
had seen the child victim in the company of the accused appellant on 
the alleged day, their natural reaction would have been to disclose 
the said fact, that they had seen the accused appellant along with 
the child victim, to the father of the girl child who had initiated the 
search operations in the afternoon of 30th September, 2013 itself 
and made enquiries at the watchman chawl as well. He submitted 
that investigation agency has resorted to padding by creating the 
evidence of the witnesses of last seen together theory.
19.	 Shri Basant, further, submitted that the evidence of extra-judicial 
confession, sought to be proved through Anil Mahatam Singh 
(PW-17), is also unreliable and unworthy of credence. While deposing 
on oath, the witness in his examination-in-chief, did not pertinently 
state that the accused appellant had made any extra-judicial 
16	
Hereinafter being referred to as the ‘CrPC’.
522
Supreme Court Reports
confession in his presence. It is only on the leading questions put by 
the Public Prosecutor, during cross-examination, that the witness tried 
to impute that the accused appellant had admitted, in his presence, 
that he had made a mistake. 
20.	 As per Shri Basant, the evidence of extra-judicial confession is even 
otherwise of very weak nature and thus, the conviction cannot be 
solely based on such evidence. In addition thereto, his contention 
was that the version of the witness (PW-17) regarding the so-called 
extra-judicial confession made by the accused appellant, is very 
vague and vacillating and hence, no reliance can be placed on his 
testimony.
21.	 Learned senior counsel further submitted that, admittedly, the 1st 
Investigating Officer (PW-16) collected the forensic samples from 
numerous watchmen living in the same chawl, where the accused 
appellant was residing, however, the FSL report pertaining to these 
samples never saw light of the day. Hence, an adverse inference has 
to be drawn that these reports were not favouring the prosecution’s 
story, which is why the same was held back from the Court.
22.	 Learned senior counsel further submitted that the FSL report17 
indicating a match between the mud/soil found on the shoes of the 
accused appellant, and the mud/soil found near the pond, from where 
the dead body of the child victim was recovered, is also vague and 
inconsequential. Firstly, the very factum of recovery of the soiled shoes 
at the instance of the accused appellant is dubitable. It is impossible 
to believe that the accused appellant, who was a free bird till 3rd 
October 2013, would meticulously preserve the worthless incriminating 
articles i.e., his shoes, lungi and the watchman uniform, for the police 
to recover the same and thereby, face the risk of being incriminated. 
23.	 Secondly, Shri Basant submitted that the FSL report depicting that 
the soil on the shoes was similar to the mud/soil of the location from 
where the victim child’s body was recovered is merely suggestive in 
nature and not conclusive. He urged that, if at all, the prosecution 
wanted to establish that the soil was from the same source, then 
a more exhaustive exercise was required to be conducted by 
collecting soil samples from different surrounding locations thereby, 
17	
Supra note 11.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
523
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
excluding the possibility of mud/soil found on the shoes being from 
the locality where the accused appellant resided. He submitted that 
the prosecution was under a burden to establish that the mud/soil of 
this kind was not to be found anywhere else except in and around 
the pond, from where the dead body of child victim was recovered. 
He thus urged that unless the prosecution excluded this possibility 
by adducing proper evidence, the FSL report would remain vague 
and inconclusive.
24.	 Shri Basant concluded his submissions by urging that the prosecution 
has miserably failed to prove a complete and unbreached chain of 
incriminating circumstances, by leading reliable evidence, and hence, 
the accused appellant is entitled to be acquitted by giving him the 
benefit of doubt.
Submissions on behalf of the respondent State:
25.	 Per contra, Ms. Rukhmini Bobde, learned standing counsel for the State 
of Maharashtra, vehemently and fervently opposed the submissions 
advanced by Shri Basant. She urged that the prosecution has 
established the guilt of the accused appellant by leading unimpeachable 
and complete chain of circumstantial evidence in the form of motive, 
last seen together circumstance, extra- judicial confession and the 
scientific evidence in the form of FSL report, which establishes that the 
shoes of accused appellant recovered by the 2nd Investigating Officer 
(PW-18) in furtherance of the information provided by him under Section 
27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, bore soil matching with that of 
the pond where the dead body of the child victim had been disposed 
of by the accused appellant after committing the crime.
26.	 She urged that neither the witnesses of the circumstance of last seen 
together and extra-judicial confession had any animosity against 
the accused appellant, nor the Investigating Officers bore any ill will 
against the accused appellant so as to falsely implicate him for the 
crime without any justification. 
27.	 She further urged that the investigation was conducted in a fair, 
transparent and unbiased manner and without being influenced 
by any extraneous consideration, the Investigating Officers, being 
Vikas Sarjerao Lokre (PW-16) and Mandar Vasant Dharmadhikari 
(PW-18), faithfully collected unimpeachable incriminating evidence 
against the accused appellant. 
524
Supreme Court Reports
28.	 She concluded her submissions urging that the finding of guilt of 
the accused appellant, as recorded by the trial Court and affirmed 
by the High Court, are based on unimpeachable and reliable 
circumstantial evidence led by the prosecution which irrefutably 
points to the guilt of the accused appellant and is inconsistent with 
his innocence or the guilt of any other person. Thus, this Court 
should be loath to interfere with the concurrent findings of facts 
while exercising jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution 
of India. She also urged that looking to the heinous nature of the 
crime, the death sentence awarded to the accused appellant is 
fit to be confirmed. 
29.	 She implored the Court to dismiss the appeals and confirm the 
conviction and sentence awarded to the accused appellant.
Discussion and Conclusion: - 
30.	 We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions 
advanced at the bar and have meticulously perused the impugned 
judgments. We have also carefully scanned and analysed the 
evidence led by the prosecution in its endeavour to bring home the 
charges against the accused appellant.
31.	 Admittedly, the case of the prosecution is based entirely on 
circumstantial evidence. The position of law in a case based 
entirely on circumstantial evidence, is well-settled by a catena of 
decisions of this Court, wherein this Court has categorically held 
that the prosecution has to prove the entire chain of incriminating 
circumstances by adducing unimpeachable evidence, which leads to 
only one hypothesis that is consistent with the guilt of the accused, 
inconsistent with his innocence or the guilt of anyone else. The chain 
of circumstances sought to be relied upon by the prosecution must 
be complete in all aspects and must unerringly link the accused 
with the crime. In case of any breach in the chain of incriminating 
circumstances, the Court would be left with no option but to acquit 
the accused by giving him the benefit of doubt. The law with regard 
to conviction based on circumstantial evidence has been crystalized 
by this Court in the case of Sharad Birdhichand Sharda v. State 
of Maharashtra18, wherein it was held:
18	
(1984) 4 SCC 116.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
525
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
“153. A close analysis of this decision would show that 
the following conditions must be fulfilled before a case 
against an accused can be said to be fully established: 
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of 
guilt is to be drawn should be fully established. 
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that 
the circumstances concerned “must or should” 
and not “may be” established. There is not only a 
grammatical but a legal distinction between “may 
be proved” and “must be or should be proved” as 
was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade 
v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793] where 
the observations were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807] 
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that 
the accused must be and not merely may 
be guilty before a court can convict and 
the mental distance between ‘may be’ 
and ‘must be’ is long and divides vague 
conjectures from sure conclusions.” 
(2) the facts so established should be consistent only 
with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that 
is to say, they should not be explainable on any other 
hypothesis except that the accused is guilty, 
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature 
and tendency, 
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis 
except the one to be proved, and 
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as 
not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion 
consistent with the innocence of the accused and must 
show that in all human probability the act must have 
been done by the accused. 
(Emphasis Supplied)
32.	 Having noted the principles governing a case based purely on 
circumstantial evidence, we now proceed to discuss the evidence 
526
Supreme Court Reports
led by the prosecution in the present case in its endeavour, to bring 
home the charges against the accused appellant.
33.	 The theory set out by the prosecution in its case is that the accused 
appellant had seen the child victim alone, playing with her dog on 
the morning of 30th September, 2013. As there was no one else in 
the vicinity, the accused appellant, driven by lust, took advantage 
of the situation, kidnapped the child and thereafter took her to room 
No. 2 of the watchmen chawl where he subjected the child victim 
to forcible sexual assault. In this process, the child tried to resist 
and cried out for help, upon which the accused appellant smashed 
the head of the child victim on the floor tiles, leading to fractures 
on the skull of the child and ultimately resulting in her death. For 
establishing the guilt of the accused appellant, the prosecution relied 
on three circumstances: -
i.	
Last seen together circumstance;
ii.	
Extra-judicial confession; and
iii.	
FSL report indicating presence of soil on the shoes of the 
accused appellant which tallied with the soil of the pond from 
where the dead body of the child victim was found.
34.	 As has been noted above, the case was of a blind murder. The 
allegations as set out in the complaint19 filed by the complainant 
(PW-1) indicate that the complainant and his mother had gone out 
of the house at 10:30 A.M. in relation to some work, leaving the 
child victim alone in the house. The complainant returned at about 
10:45 A.M. and at that time, neither the child nor the pet dog of the 
complainant was present in the house. The complainant immediately 
launched a search for the child, making inquiries from his mother 
and the people in the vicinity but to no avail.
35.	 Hence, what can be deduced from the version set out in the complaint 
is that the child victim went out of the house between 10:30 A.M. to 
10:45 A.M. and was not seen by the complainant thereafter. As per 
the complaint, the complainant came back to the house around 10:45 
A.M., and could not find the child, on which he started searching 
for her.
19	
Exh. 61. 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
527
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
36.	 In this process, the complainant (PW-1) visited the watchmen chawl, 
which is situated in close vicinity to his house. He found his dog in 
the said chawl, however, the child was nowhere to be seen. Thus, 
presumably the child victim must have gone missing within the small 
window of 10:30 A.M. and 10:45 A.M. It is undisputed that the child 
victim’s body was recovered from a pond, which is around one 
kilometer away from the purported place of the incident, i.e., room 
No. 2 of the watchmen chawl, on 2nd October, 2013. We are of the 
prima facie opinion that the case of the prosecution, particularly on 
the aspect of time, manner and place of the incident is doubtful.
37.	 It is admitted that the complainant had started the search operations 
around 10:45 A.M. and had also searched in and around the watchmen 
chawl. As is borne out from the evidence available on record, the area 
where the complainant resided is thickly populated and inhabited by 
a large number of persons who work as watchmen. The prosecution 
claims that the incident took place in broad daylight sometime after 
10:30 A.M. Mainfestly thus, there was hardly any possibility that the 
accused appellant could have carried the child victim’s dead body 
to the pond, which was located one kilometer away, without being 
noticed. Hence, two possible scenarios arise: -
(i)	
That the incident did not take place in the chawl as claimed by 
the prosecution; and/or 
(ii)	
The incident did not take place at the time or in the manner 
alleged by the prosecution.
38.	 Having noted this inherent improbability in the prosecution case, we 
now proceed to discuss the evidence of the material prosecution 
witnesses.
39.	 For the purpose of appreciating the circumstance of last seen together, 
the relevant witnesses are the complainant, i.e., Manoj Bhaskar 
Sadavarte [(PW-1), father of the deceased child], Dipendrakumar 
Dhirendranath Shukla (PW-9), Pradipkumar Ganesh Rawat (PW-14) 
and Sanjay Ganesh Rawat (PW-15).
40.	 The complainant, Manoj Bhaskar Sadavarte (PW-1) virtually repeated 
the story as set out in the complaint20. He tried to introduce an 
20	
Supra note 19.
528
Supreme Court Reports
improvement that on the same day, i.e., the day of the incident, 
at about 2:00 P.M., he went to the watchmen chawl while he was 
searching for his daughter and saw the accused appellant standing 
behind his house and his legs were soiled with mud. He was wearing 
lungi and banyan. The witness enquired from the accused appellant 
regarding his daughter (child victim), but the accused appellant did 
not tell him anything.
41.	 In examination-in-chief, the witness stated that on seeing the accused 
appellant with his legs soiled with mud/soil, he started suspecting 
him. He admitted having made inquiries from his neighbour, Devidas 
Kale, shop owner Raju Pukraj Choudhari and rickshaw driver Jaybhim 
Channappa Kamble and other female members in the crowd. All 
these witnesses stated that they had seen the little girl playing with 
the dog. He proved the spot panchnama. In the cross-examination, 
he admitted that the name of the accused appellant as a suspect 
was not mentioned in the complaint. He had gone to the chawl 
three times on 30th September, 2013, and his suspicion was on the 
accused appellant. He made the following important admission in 
his cross-examination: -
“On 03.10.2013 police recorded my supplementary 
statement in between 11.30 a.m. to 12.00 noon. Till that 
time nobody has stated that they had seen any person 
who took my daughter.”
42.	 Dipendrakumar Dhirendranath Shukla (PW-9) deposed in his evidence 
that he was working as a watchman and used to reside in a transit 
camp which was in front of Unnati Woods. At a distance of about 2 
to 3 lines from his house, some 15 to 20 watchmen used to reside. 
The witness admitted that he did not know the accused appellant 
by name but recognized him by his face as he used to regularly 
pass through the road in front of the witness’s house. The accused 
appellant was also residing in the same chawl. The witness stated 
that on 30th September, 2013, at around 11:30 A.M. to 12:00 P.M., 
he was taking lunch when he saw a small girl, aged about 2 ½ to 
3 years, heading down the road with a dog. He could see the child 
from the open gate of his house. At about 01:00 P.M., the witness 
and his father came back to the house for some work, and, at 
that time, he noticed that the dog he had seen with the child was 
wandering around on the road, but the child was nowhere to be 
seen. The witness claims to have seen the accused appellant coming 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
529
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
from behind the bushes at around the same point of time. He was 
wearing a watchman’s uniform. The witness thereafter went back 
to work. At about 04:00 P.M., when he came back to his house, he 
noticed that people were searching for a small girl. He was shown 
the photograph of the missing girl (child victim), which he identified 
to be the same child whom he had seen earlier in the afternoon. He 
further stated that the body of the child victim was found in the pond 
on 2nd October, 2013, after which he narrated the entire incident, 
witnessed by him, to the police. 
43.	 In his cross-examination, the witness (PW-9) admitted that on 30th 
September, 2013, the police made inquiries from him in relation to the 
case, but his statement was not recorded on that date. On 2nd October 
2013, the police again visited the crime scene, but his statement 
was still not recorded. He further stated that some 25 to 30 north 
Indian people were residing in the transit camp and were working as 
watchmen. The police summoned all these people for the purposes 
of inquiry. The witness was confronted with certain improvements 
vis-à-vis his previous statement recorded under Section 161 of the 
CrPC. However, these improvements are trivial and inconsequential 
for our purpose. The witness denied the suggestion given by the 
defence that he was making a false deposition regarding having seen 
the accused appellant coming from behind the bushes. However, 
he admitted that the police did not call him for the test identification 
of the accused appellant.
44.	 What is pertinent to note from the statement of this witness is that 
he was aware on 30th September, 2013, itself that the child victim 
had gone missing and people were searching for her. The police 
visited the vicinity on 30th September, 2013; 1st October, 2013 and 
2nd October, 2013 as well, but the witness (PW-9) did not divulge the 
vital information to the police that he had seen the child with the dog 
in the vicinity of watchmen chawl and the accused appellant coming 
out of the bushes. Apparently, thus, the conduct of the witness in 
maintaining stoic silence and not divulging to the police at the first 
available opportunity that he had seen the child victim in the afternoon 
of 30th September, 2013, or that he had seen the accused appellant 
coming out from the bushes makes his entire testimony doubtful. 
45.	 As is borne out from the record, the statement of this witness 
(PW-9) was recorded by the Mandar Vasant Dharmadhikari 
530
Supreme Court Reports
(PW-18), the Investigating Officer, under Section 161 of the CrPC 
on 3rd October, 2013. Hence, the conduct of the witness (PW-9), in 
remaining indifferent and failing to disclose the vital fact of having 
seen the accused appellant and the child victim on 30th September, 
2013, despite the search operations being undertaken and the police 
having visited the crime scene twice within his knowledge. This vital 
omission on part of the witness (PW-9) completely discredits his 
version and thus, we conclude that Dipendrakumar Dhirendranath 
Shukla (PW-9) is not a reliable witness.
46.	 Pradipkumar Ganesh Rawat (PW-14) stated, in his evidence, that he 
was residing near the Unnati Woods and used to work as a watchman. 
His duty hours were between 08:00 A.M. to 08:00 P.M. He used to go 
home to have lunch usually around 12.00 P.M. The witness (PW-14) 
claimed that he knew the accused appellant from before because 
he too was engaged as a watchman and was residing at a gap of 4 
to 5 rooms from the room in which the witness resided. He stated 
that the accused appellant went to take lunch at about 12:00 P.M. on 
30th September, 2013. The witness (PW-14) proceeded towards his 
house for lunch at 12:10 P.M. He claims to have seen the accused 
appellant standing with a small girl and an English dog on the road, 
which was besides the forest. At that time, the accused appellant was 
wearing his watchman uniform. The witness did not pay much heed 
to this event and proceeded to his house for lunch. When he was 
returning at about 12:50 P.M., he noticed that the dog was tied to 
the window of the room where Sanjay Ganesh Rawat (PW-15) used 
to reside. On 2nd October, 2013, when the witness was called to the 
police station, he came to know that the dead body of the child victim 
had been found in the pond. The police showed him the photograph, 
and the witness identified it to be of the same child who was with 
the accused appellant. The witness claimed that he divulged to the 
police that he had seen the child victim with the accused appellant 
at about 12:40 P.M. on 30th September, 2013, upon which the police 
recorded his statement. However, no such statement of the witness 
is available on record and rather, the evidence of 2nd Investigating 
Officer (PW-18) is to the contrary. 
47.	 In his cross-examination, the witness (PW-14) stated that the pond 
from where the body of the child victim was found is at a distance of 
about one kilometer from his house. He came to know on 1st October, 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
531
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
2013, that a girl was missing from the area. The police called about 
30 watchmen to the police station for the purpose of inquiry, as 
suspects and he was also one amongst them. The witness denied 
the suggestion that his statement was not recorded on 2nd October, 
2013. Immediately thereafter, he stated that the police recorded 
his statement on the next morning. A suggestion was given to the 
witness that he was speaking a falsehood when he stated that he 
had seen the dog tied to Sanjay Ganesh Rawat’s (PW-15) room or 
that he had seen the accused appellant along with the child victim 
and an English dog. He denied the suggestion given by the defence, 
that the police had threatened him and thus, he gave a statement, 
incriminating the accused appellant. 
48.	 At this stage, we may note that the statement of this witness 
(PW-14) was recorded under Section 164 of the CrPC and was 
exhibited by the prosecution as Ext. 94. It was inter alia noted in 
the said statement that the accused appellant and his father left for 
lunch at about 12:00 P.M., whereas he (the witness) left for lunch at 
12:10 P.M. While he was proceeding, he saw the accused appellant 
standing on the road. He had lunch at his room and left to report 
for duty at about 12:40 P.M. At that time, he saw a dog tied to the 
window of a room. He later learnt that the accused appellant had 
tied the said dog there. Subsequently, he also came to know that a 
3-year-old girl child was missing and that her dead body was found 
near the chawl. 
49.	 Apparently, thus, while testifying on oath, the witness has made 
wholesale improvements from the version as set out in his statement 
under Section 164 of the CrPC wherein he did not utter a word 
about having seen the child victim on 30th September, 2013. These 
improvements are most vital and have a direct bearing on the 
credibility of the deposition of the witness (PW-14). We are convinced 
that the witness (PW-14) deliberately modulated and twisted the 
facts in order to lend succour to the prosecution’s case against the 
accused appellant. Thus, findings recorded by the trial Court as well 
as the High Court that the witness (PW-14) has given unimpeachable 
testimony supporting circumstance of the last seen together, are 
untenable and unsustainable on the face of the record. For record, 
we may note that this witness (PW-14) too, did not come forward 
to state about the circumstance of last seen together to the police 
officials who visited the crime scene on 30th September, 2013; 1st 
532
Supreme Court Reports
October, 2013 and 2nd October, 2013. The witness has also made 
blatant improvements from his earlier version recorded under Section 
164 of the CrPC, and hence, his testimony cannot be relied upon 
so as to lend credence to the last seen circumstance.
50.	 Sanjay Ganesh Rawat (PW-15) stated that he was residing near 
the Unnati Wood Society in the year 2013 and was working as a 
watchman in Phase No. 1, Building No. 3. On the day of the incident, 
he went home to take lunch at about 01:00 P.M. and saw that a dog 
was tied to the window of his room. When he came back after taking 
lunch, he saw a person with long hair enquiring from the accused 
appellant that “the dog is here, so where is the child?” The accused 
appellant was wearing a lungi and baniyan at that point in time.
51.	 We feel that the evidence of the witness (PW-15) is neither here nor 
there because the witness does not give any indication of having seen 
the accused appellant with the child. The so-called person having long 
hair was not pinpointed by the prosecution, and hence, the testimony 
of this witness does not lend any support to the prosecution case.
52.	 Vikas Sanjerao Lokre [(PW-16), 1st Investigating Officer] was working 
as an Assistant Police Inspector at the Police Station Kasarvadavali 
on 30th September, 2013. He was assigned the investigation of the 
present case on 30th September, 2013. The witness (PW-16) stated 
that upon receiving the investigation file, he visited the site and 
undertook a search for the girl. He conducted intensive combing 
operations throughout the area. On 1st October, 2013, he prepared 
the spot panchnama (search panchnama). The said panchnama was 
exhibited by the prosecution as Exh. 34 and it bears the signatures 
of the witness (PW-16) and the complainant (PW-1) in addition to the 
panchas. The panchnama gives specific reference to the complainant 
having made inquiries from Premshankar Jayshankar Gupta at 10:45 
A.M., Raju Pukraj Choudhari at 11:00 A.M., Jaybhim Channappa 
Kamble at 11:15 A.M. It also mentioned in the panchnama that the 
complainant made enquiries from Dipendrakumar Dhirendranath 
Shukla (PW-9) and Pradipkumar Ganesh Rawat (PW-14) as well. 
The panchnama specifically records that all these persons had 
seen the child victim along with the dog in a time bound sequence 
commencing from 10:45 A.M. onwards. However, there is no whisper 
in the panchnama regarding any of the witnesses having divulged 
that the child victim had been seen in the company of the accused 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
533
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
appellant. This is a significant loophole and a grave shortcoming 
in the prosecution case. It may be stated that the 1st Investigating 
Officer (PW-16) did not make any effort to make an enquiry from 
Premshankar Jayshankar Gupta, Raju Pukraj Choudhari and Jaybhim 
Channappa Kamble, either on 30th September 2013 or 1st October 
2013. In the natural course of events, these persons would have 
been the first in the line of sight of the Investigating Officer (PW-
16) to unfurl the sequence of events and to take leads about the 
child victim’s whereabouts. Had there been any sincerity in the 1st 
Investigating Officer’s actions, he would have immediately ventured 
to make a thorough investigation into the persons whose names 
surfaced in the panchnama without losing any time. However, no 
such effort was made by the Investigating Officer (PW-16). 
53.	 The statements of Dipendrakumar Dhirendranath Shukla (PW-9) 
and Pradipkumar Ganesh Rawat (PW-14), the star prosecution 
witnesses of the last seen circumstance, were recorded by the 
2nd Investigating Officer (PW-18) for the first time as late as 3rd 
October 2013, as is borne out from his deposition. Apparently, 
thus, till 3rd October 2013, there was not a shred of evidence on 
the investigation file which could have incriminated the accused 
appellant for the crime. In spite thereof, the accused appellant was 
arrested in this case.
54.	 The investigation was handed over by Vikas Sarjerao Lokre (PW-16) 
to Inspector Mandar Vasant Dharmadhikari (PW-18), on 3rd October, 
2013, who continued the investigation thereafter. At the cost of 
repetition, it may be noted that the 1st Investigating Officer (PW-16), 
did not make any effort to record the evidence of the most material 
prosecution witnesses, namely, Dipendrakumar Dhirendranath 
Shukla (PW-9) and Pradipkumar Ganesh Rawat (PW-14), who 
later on vouched to the last seen circumstance as projected by the 
prosecution. This omission is fatal to the prosecution case, as it 
impinges on the credibility of the witnesses’ version and also gives 
a clear indication about flawed and tainted investigation.
55.	 It is only when Mandar Vasant Dharmadhikari (PW-18, 2nd Investigating 
Officer), took over investigation of the case on 3rd October, 2013, 
that the statements of the witnesses of the last seen circumstance 
were recorded for the first time. The witness made the categorical 
admissions in his cross-examination which are reproduced as under: -
534
Supreme Court Reports
“(9) In the spot panchanama at Exh.30 names of witnesses 
Dipendra Shukla and Pradeep Rawat are mentioned. I have 
not enquired with Shri Lokare as to whether he recorded 
statements of both these witnesses and I have also not 
recorded statement of Shri Lokare to that respect. Prior to 
03.10.2013 said witnesses never stated that they had seen 
the deceased girl with the accused. It is true to say that 
said both the witnesses are residing in the transit camp.”
56.	 Thus, we have no hesitation in holding that the witnesses, namely, 
Dipendrakumar Dhirendranath Shukla (PW-9) and Pradipkumar 
Ganesh Rawat (PW-14), were created by the Investigating Officers, 
by way of padding, because a case of sensational nature was 
not being solved. Their evidence is totally false and unworthy of 
credence. The witness Sanjay Ganesh Rawat (PW-15) did not state 
in his testimony that he had seen the child victim in the company of 
the accused appellant, and hence, his evidence does not give any 
support to the circumstance of last seen together. Thus, we have no 
hesitation in holding that the prosecution miserably failed to prove 
the circumstance of last seen together by leading credible evidence.
57.	 The second segment of circumstantial evidence on which the 
prosecution heavily relied upon was that of the extra-judicial 
confession allegedly made by the accused appellant to Anil Mahatam 
Singh (PW-17), who was the Supervisor under whom the accused 
appellant was working. The witness (PW-17) stated that he knew 
the accused appellant, who had joined duty as a watchman about 
6 to 7 days before the incident. On 30th September 2013, a small 
girl went missing. On that day, the accused appellant was assigned 
work at Phase 2 Building No. 5 and had reported for duty. The 
police came to the building for the purpose of inquiry and took some 
watchmen from there. On the next day, i.e., on 1st October 2013, he 
went for a round but did not find the accused appellant on duty. The 
accused appellant was summoned through his father. The accused 
appellant turned up at the project and, upon being questioned by 
the witness about his absence from duty, he claimed to be tensed 
up and stated that he could not perform his duties and that he would 
be going back to his village on the same day. The witness (PW-17) 
was cross-examined by the Public Prosecutor and while answering 
the leading questions put to him, he admitted that he had stated 
before the police that the accused appellant told him that he could 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
535
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
not work as he was tensed up and that he had made a mistake. 
The witness (PW-17) also agreed to the suggestion of the public 
prosecutor that the accused appellant divulged before him that he 
had been called by the police the day before and in reference thereto, 
he had committed a mistake.
58.	 The significant fact which requires mention at this stage is that 
the statement of Anil Mahatam Singh (PW-17) recorded under 
Section 164 of the CrPC, was proved at the instance of the prosecution 
as Exh. 78, wherein the witness stated that on 1st October, 2013, 
he did not see the accused appellant while marking attendance. 
He then made inquiries about the accused appellant’s absence and 
summoned him to the circle. 
59.	 When the witness asked the accused appellant about his absence, 
the accused appellant replied that he was tensed up. On hearing 
this, the witness told the accused appellant that staying idle would 
not help and that he should resume his duty to relieve the tension. 
The accused appellant agreed and complied with the suggestion and 
resumed his duty. Thus, in the previous statement of the witness 
(PW-17) recorded under Section 164 of the CrPC, there is no 
reference to any extra-judicial confession having been made by the 
accused appellant. Furthermore, the statement of the said witness 
under Section 161 of the CrPC was recorded as late as on 12th 
October 2013, as stated by the Investigating Officer (PW-18). 
60.	 Hence, the statement of the witness (PW-17) on the aspect of extra-
judicial confession is full of improvements and contradictions and 
hence, it is totally unreliable. If at all, the accused appellant had 
made an extra-judicial confession before the witness on 1st October, 
2013, his immediate reaction would have been to rush to the police 
and divulge this fact to the Investigating Officer (PW-16). However, 
he made no such effort whatsoever.
61.	 In this background, the evidence of PW-17 regarding the extra-judicial 
confession, [which is otherwise also a very weak piece of evidence], 
is totally unreliable and unacceptable and does not lend succour to 
the prosecution case.
62.	 In a case based on circumstantial evidence, the evidence of 
Investigating Officer/s is of utmost importance. The Investigating 
Officer, Vikas Sarjerao Lokre (PW-16) stated in his evidence as 
below: -
536
Supreme Court Reports
Examination in Chief of PW-16
“….Then we called the dog squad to take the search of 
the victim girl. We have taken the efforts but said girl 
was not traced out. Accordingly I have submitted the 
report. Now shown to me. It bears my signature as well 
as signature of the authority of Dog Squad. Contents are 
true and correct. It is at Exh.70. Then I have circulated the 
photograph of the victim girl to the various police stations 
for her search. Now that letter shown to me. It bears my 
signature. Contents are true and correct. It is at Exh.71. 
I have also forwarded the wireless message inter-state 
along with the detail description of the victim girl. Now 
that wireless message shown to me. It bears signature of 
Sr. PI Dharmadhakari. I know his signature. Contents are 
true and correct. It is at Exh.72. Then, I have recorded 
the statements of those witnesses who had lastly seen 
that girl. I have also recorded the statement of the mother 
of victim girl.
Then on 02.10.2013 when our police squad was taking 
the search of that girl we had found dead body of one 
small girl in the muddy pond near about 2.00 p.m. Then 
we called the person from Fire Brigade and removed that 
dead body out of the pond. I called two panch witnesses 
and prepared panchanama of that spot in their presence. 
That panchanama is at Exh.38. Now shown to me. It bears 
my signature, signatures of two panch witnesses. Contents 
are true and correct. Measurement of said pond is 25 X 
15 ft. It was behind the Unnati Wood Society, in one field 
near one nala. There was cloth on the said dead body i.e. 
pink colour full sleeves T-shirt. On the distance of 20 ft. I 
have found the stamp-marks of the legs of dog from the 
said pond. I have seized the water of that pond and earth 
which was out of the pond. 1 sealed it with the signature of 
panch witnesses. Then I have deposited said muddemal by 
preparing muddemal receipt with the muddemal clerk. Now 
that receipt shown to me. It bears my signature. Contents 
are true and correct. It is at Exh.73. Then I have prepared 
the inquest panchanama of the dead body in presence 
of two panch witnesses. That time complainant identified 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
537
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
his daughter. That inquest panchanama is at Exh.47. 
Now shown to me. It bears my signature and signatures 
of two witnesses. Contents are true and correct. Then I 
have forwarded the said dead body for post-mortem at 
Civil Hospital, Thane. The said letter is now shown to me. 
It bears my signature. Contents are true and correct. It 
is at Exh.74. Then Civil Hospital referred the dead body 
to J.J. Hospital. Therefore, I have issued a letter to J.J. 
Hospital. Said letter is at Exh.56. It bears my signature. 
Contents are true and correct. Moreover, it also bears the 
acknowledgment of J.J. Hospital. Then I have also issued 
request letter to J.J. Hospital that while conducting the 
post-mortem it should be conduct under the photography 
and video shooting. The said letter is at Exh.57. It bears 
my signature. Contents are true and correct. Then doctor 
has issued Advance Cause of Death Certificate which 
mentioned the reason that death due to head injury with 
evidence of extensive genital injuries- unnatural. Then I 
have added sections in the present offence and accordingly 
issued letter to the concerned Court…..”
Cross-Examination of PW-16
On 01.10.2013 I have recorded the statements of 
witnesses Ganesh Dhaki, Jayashri Datar, Arti Navin 
Dhondi. It is true to say that they have not stated that 
they had seen the victim girl. There are five names 
comes in the panchanama at Exh.30, out of those 
on 01.10.2013 I have recorded the statement of one 
witness by name Premshankar Gupta. He has not 
stated that he had seen that girl along with accused. 
On 01.10.2013 I have also visited to the watchman 
chawl. I went there for only one time. Near about 30 to 
40 watchmen were residing there. But on 01.10.2013 
I have not recorded statement of single watchman.
When I visited to the house of complainant there was no 
dog. I have not prepared the panchanama of that female 
dog and also not obtained her photographs. Moreover, 
where I found the scratches of the nails of dog I have not 
obtained the photographs of that place and also not called 
expert to identify those scratches.
538
Supreme Court Reports
Alleged pond is on the open space and it is accessible for 
anybody. It is not true to say that dead body of the said 
girl was fully decomposed. It is true to say that where said 
dog was tied on the window of the room of watchman, 
I have not recorded statement of that watchman. I have 
recorded the statement of grandmother of deceased girl 
by name Mayavati Bhaskar Sadavarte on 01.10.2013. She 
has also stated that she has taken the search of their 
granddaughter in the watchman chaw]. But she has not 
expressed her doubt towards any watchman. I have not 
recorded the statement of any witness on 01.10.2013 
stating that anybody had seen that girl along with 
accused. Virendrakumar Shukla and Pradeeikumar 
Rawat are residing in the transit chaw!. Ashapura 
Kirana Shop is on the distance of 10 to 15 minutes 
from the alleged pond. Witness Pushkaran Chaudhary 
has stated that when he had seen that girl he told to her 
to go to her house. That time she proceeded towards 
her house. That time was of 11.00 a.m. It is not true to 
say that I am deposing false that Jaybhim Kamble had 
seen that girl along with dog at Manera Chawl. It is not 
true to say that I am deposing false that I had seen the 
scratches of dog’s nails on the window where dog was 
tied. It is not true to say that I have not recorded the 
statements of witnesses as per their say. It is not true 
to say that I have not prepared panchanama at Exh.38 
on the spot. It is not true to say that her father was 
not identified the dead body because her face was not 
identifiable. It is not true to say that I am deposing false 
that there was stamp-mark of that dog near the pond. 
It is not true to say that inquest panchanama was not 
prepared as per Exh.47. It is not true to say that I have 
not seized the clothes of that girl vide Exh.23 and not 
deposited muddemal in presence of panch. witnesses. 
It is not true to say that I have not taken the opinion of 
the doctor that why such genital injuries were caused to 
deceased girl. But to that respect no document is filed 
along with the charge-sheet.”
(Emphasis supplied)
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
539
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
63.	 The significant facts, which can be deduced from the evidence of the 
Investigating Officer (PW-16), are that he made fervent attempts to 
trace the child victim on 30th September, 2013 and 1st October, 2013. 
In the spot panchnama21 prepared by the witness on 1st October, 
2013 between 7.30 A.M. to 8.45 A.M., there is a clear reference to 
the witnesses of the last seen circumstance, but in spite thereof, the 
officer made no effort whatsoever to record the statements of those 
witnesses. This is grave infirmity in the investigation which impinges 
on the credibility of the Investigating Officer and the witnesses of the 
last seen circumstance. The present case, being a case of grave 
nature, it does not stand to reason that in spite of the names of the 
witnesses of last seen circumstance having been mentioned in the 
spot panchnama prepared on 1st October, 2013, and despite the fact 
that the witness (PW-16) was making strenuous efforts to trace out 
the child victim from 30th September, 2013 and 1st October, 2013, 
none of the witnesses claimed to have seen the child victim in the 
company of the accused appellant were examined by the Investigating 
Officer (PW-16). It is difficult, if not impossible, to believe that even 
though fervent efforts were going on to search for the missing child in 
the colony, the witnesses who claimed to have seen the child victim 
with the accused appellant would not have stepped forward to give 
leads to the 1st Investigating Officer (PW-16) at the earliest possible 
opportunity. These significant omissions and fundamental flaws in the 
investigation are sufficient to satisfy us that the witnesses of the last 
seen circumstance were created to add padding to the prosecution 
case and as a matter of fact, none of them had seen the accused 
appellant and the deceased (child victim) together.
64.	 In the cross-examination of Mandar Vasant Dharmadhikari [(PW-18), 
i.e., 2nd Investigating Officer], the following significant facts were 
elicited: -
“In the spot panchanama at Exh.30 names of witnesses 
Dipendra Shukla and Pradeep Rawat are mentioned. 
I have not enquired with Shri Lokare as to whether 
he recorded statements of both these witnesses and 
I have also not recorded statement of Shri Lokare to 
that respect. Prior to 03.10.2013 said witnesses never 
stated that they had seen the deceased girl with the 
21	
Supra note 6.
540
Supreme Court Reports
accused. It is true to say that said both the witnesses 
are residing in the transit camp. I have not prepared 
the panchanama of female dog and also not included her 
photograph in the documents. In the complaint at Exh. 20 no 
name of accused is mentioned. All the incidence spots are 
situated in the open space and anybody can access there.
There is a road connected to Unnati Society and peoples 
used that road. It is not true to say that there is no 
documentary evidence produced on record regarding 
the said chawl where accused was residing. Accused is 
residing in the present chawl, showing the said fact there is 
no documentary evidence on record. But it has come in the 
statements of witnesses. Complainant has not stated that 
whether any witness had seen the deceased girl with the 
accused. But he has stated it in supplementary statement.
In the present matter T.I. Parade was not conducted. 
It is true to say that during the investigation some 
witnesses were knowing to the accused and some 
witnesses were not knowing to him. When I have 
arrested the accused I have not examined his private part. 
It is not true to say that at the time of arrest there was no 
abrasion on the foreskin of accused. It is not true to say 
that to involve the accused in the present matter we made 
abrasion on his private part. It is mandatory that after the 
arrest of accused within 24 hours he has to forward for 
his medical examination. It is not true to say that I have 
not forwarded him for examination immediately.”
(Emphasis supplied)
65.	 Thus, the witness (PW-18) affirms the fact that the witnesses of the 
last seen theory who were residing in the transit camp did not step 
forward to disclose to the police that they had seen the deceased girl 
with the accused appellant. Neither of the two Investigating Officers 
uttered a word regarding the witness Anil Mahatam Singh (PW-17) 
coming forward and disclosing that the accused appellant had made 
an extra-judicial confession in his presence.
66.	 Thus, upon an overall appreciation of the evidence of the two 
Investigating Officers and the witnesses of the last seen theory 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
541
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
and so also the sole witness of extra-judicial confession, we are 
convinced that the entire sequence of events narrated by these 
witnesses is unreliable and unbelievable. It is clearly a case of 
concocted depositions secured by the prosecuting agency by way 
of padding so as to fasten the guilt of this heinous crime, on the 
accused appellant and thereby lay a claim to have solved the case.
67.	 Deputy Superintendent of Police, Mandar Vasant Dharmadhikari 
[(PW-18), 2nd Investigating Officer], was assigned the investigation 
of the case on 3rd October, 2013. He visited the place of the incident 
and claims to have recovered some blood stained soil from the 
second room in the watchmen chawl. The evidence of this witness 
(PW-18) does not indicate as to how he reached the conclusion that 
the crime had taken place in the said room. The accused appellant 
was arrested on 3rd October, 2013. Till then, there was no material 
on the investigation file so as to even cast a minimal suspicion 
against the accused appellant. The Investigating Officers did not even 
possess the barest evidence which could have pointed a finger of 
suspicion towards the accused appellant. Thus, the very foundation 
for arresting the appellant in this case is lacking. The witness (PW-18) 
also collected forensic samples and recovered allegedly incriminating 
materials in furtherance of the information provided by the accused 
appellant. He claims to have recovered a lungi, a baniyan, a pair 
of shoes and the watchman uniform worn by the accused appellant 
from his room. These recoveries were effected on 8th October, 2013.
68.	 Both the Investigating Officers had made extensive investigation in 
the entire area and this definitely would have included the search 
of the room of the accused appellant. At this stage, it is pertinent 
to note that Vikas Sarjerao Lokre (PW-16) admitted in his cross-
examination that he had visited the watchmen chawl on 1st October 
2013. Hence, if at all, these articles were lying in the room of the 
accused appellant, they would not have escaped the notice of the 
1st Investigating Officer (PW-16). Clearly thus, the factum of recovery 
of incriminating articles at the instance of the accused appellant by 
the 2nd Investigating Officer (PW-18) does not inspire confidence.
69.	 In addition to the fact that none of the articles recovered at the instance 
of the accused appellant tested positive for the presence of the human 
blood or semen, the fact remains that the accused appellant could 
not be expected to preserve these worthless incriminating articles 
for a period of three days, during which he was a free bird, so as to 
542
Supreme Court Reports
provide incriminating material against himself. Thus, these recoveries, 
apart from being inconsequential, are also doubtful.
70.	 The FSL report22 and the DNA Analysis Report23 did not result in any 
positive finding regarding the presence of human blood or semen on 
the clothing and other articles seized at the instance of the accused 
appellant. The DNA analysis report remained inconclusive does not 
implicate the accused appellant. Neither the trial Court nor the High 
Court placed reliance on these reports for recording a finding against 
the accused appellant.
71.	 The only so-called incriminating scientific report (Exh. 105) against 
the accused appellant was pertaining to the comparison of the soil/
mud on the sole of the pair of shoes recovered at the instance of 
the accused appellant and the specimen soil recovered from the 
pond where the dead body of the child victim was found. The said 
report was exhibited as Ext. 105 and indicates that the soil sample 
collected from the pair of shoes tallied with the soil sample that 
was recovered from the pond in respects of hue, physio-chemical 
characteristics and spectro-chemical composition.
72.	 First of all, we may observe that there is no evidence to show that the 
aforesaid observations made by the expert in Ext. 105 are admissible 
ipso facto under Section 293 of the CrPC which is equivalent to 
Section 329 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. It may 
be noted that the expert who prepared the report was not examined 
by the prosecution.
73.	 Furthermore, the findings in this report are absolutely vague and 
inconclusive. If at all, the prosecution desired to prove without any 
exception that the soil found on the shoes of the accused appellant 
was unexceptionally from the location from where the dead body of 
the child victim was recovered, then the Investigating Officer (PW-18) 
should have collected soil samples from the other places frequented 
by the accused appellant. Then only the possibility of the soil not 
being from any other place visited by the accused appellant could 
have been excluded.
74.	 In any event, even if it is held that the soil/mud found on the shoes 
of the accused appellant tallied with the soil found in the pond, that 
22	
Exh. 104.
23	
Supra note 10.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
543
Ramkirat Munilal Goud v. State of Maharashtra Etc.
would be just an indication of the fact that the accused appellant 
may have visited the area surrounding the pond at some point of 
time. This, by itself, would not incriminate the accused appellant in 
any manner.
75.	 Resultantly, we conclude: -
(i)	
that the evidence of the witnesses of last seen circumstance 
is vacillating, shaky and tainted with wholesale improvements, 
and hence, unworthy of credence.
(ii)	
the conduct of the witnesses of the last seen circumstance in failing 
to timely step forward to make a disclosure to the Investigating 
Officer (PW-16) that they had seen the accused appellant and 
the deceased child victim together on the date of the incident 
in spite of the fact that the police officers were regularly visiting 
Unnati Woods area, right from late hours of 30th September, 2013 
onwards, clearly indicates that these witnesses are untrustworthy 
and were created by the investigation agency for ulterior motive;
(iii)	 There was a clear reference to the witnesses of last seen 
circumstance, namely the complainant, i.e., Manoj Bhaskar 
Sadavarte [(PW-1), father of the deceased child], Dipendrakumar 
Dhirendranath Shukla (PW-9), Pradipkumar Ganesh Rawat 
(PW-14) and Sanjay Ganesh Rawat (PW-15) in the spot 
panchnama (Exh. 34) which was prepared by Vikas Sarjerao 
Lokre (PW-16, i.e., Investigating Officer) on 1st October, 2013, 
at around 7.30 A.M. In spite thereof, the 1st Investigating Officer 
(PW-16) made no effort whatsoever to record the statements 
of these witnesses at the earliest available opportunity. Rather, 
the said Investigating Officer did not record the statements 
of these witnesses at all, and the witnesses were examined 
for the first time on 3rd October, 2013 by the 2nd Investigating 
Officer, i.e., Shri Mandar Vasant Dharmadhikari (PW-18). This 
omission is vital and indicative of gross negligence on the part 
of the Investigation Officers.
(iv)	 The evidence of extra-judicial confession as deposed by Anil 
Mahatam Singh (PW-17) is also unacceptable because the said 
witness too did not step forward to inform the police regarding 
the fact of the so called extra-judicial confession made by the 
accused appellant before him, in spite of being aware that the 
police was searching for the child.
544
Supreme Court Reports
(v)	
That the FSL report (Ext. 105) regarding the similarity of soil 
samples is also inconsequential for the reasons mentioned 
supra.
(vi)	 The reports pertaining to the comparison of the samples 
taken from the other watchmen never saw the light of the day 
because prosecution chose not to place the same on record. 
Hence, it is clearly a case where the prosecution has withheld 
important evidence thereby, compelling the Court to draw 
adverse inference against the prosecution.
76.	 Thus, we are compelled to hold that flawed and tainted investigation 
has eventually led to the failure of the prosecution case involving the 
gruesome rape and murder of a child at the tender age of 3 years 
and 9 months only. Despite there being hardly any reliable evidence 
on the record of the case, the accused appellant was convicted and 
sentenced by the Courts below and has suffered incarceration for 
almost 12 years of which 6 years were under the Damocles sword 
of death penalty. The findings recorded in the impugned judgments 
holding the accused guilty of charges framed against him, are based 
on conjectures and surmises and hence, both the judgments and the 
order of sentence are unsustainable on the face of record.
77.	 As an upshot of the above discussion, the impugned judgment dated 
25th November, 2021 passed by the High Court and judgment of 
conviction dated 5th March, 2019, and the order of sentence dated 
8th March, 2019, passed by the trial Court, do not stand to scrutiny 
and are hereby quashed and set aside.
78.	 Resultantly, the appeals are allowed.
79.	 The appellant is acquitted of the charges. He is in custody and shall 
be released forthwith, if not required in any other case.
80.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain