[2025] 1 S.C.R. 718 : 2025 INSC 52
Vijay Prabhu 
v. 
S.T. Lajapathie & Ors. 
(Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 25246 of 2023)
08 January 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court was justified in finding that the original 
plaintiff was not entitled to discretionary relief of specific 
performance under Section 12 of the Specific Relief Act; whether 
the relinquishment of claim to further performance of the remaining 
part of the contract can be made at any stage of litigation.
Headnotes†
Specific Relief Act 1963 – s.12 – Specific performance of 
part of contract – Petitioner/plaintiff instituted a suit seeking 
specific performance of agreement and delivery of possession 
of suit property; alternatively, he sought damages – Trial Court 
rejected prayer for specific performance – Directed refund of 
earnest money to plaintiff – In appeal, High Court held plaintiff 
could not claim specific performance under Section 12 – SLP 
dismissed – Plaintiff not ready and willing to perform his part 
of the contract – Cannot invoke Section 12(3) – Power to grant 
partial relief under Section 12(3) discretionary – To be exercised 
keeping in mind facts and circumstances of the case:
Held: Petitioner/plaintiff instituted a suit seeking specific performance 
of the agreement to sell and for delivery of possession of the suit 
property, seeking damages with interest in the alternative – Trial Court 
rejected prayer for specific performance and directed refund of earnest 
money with interest – High Court held plaintiff could not invoke Section 
12(3), Specific Relief Act, to claim specific performance of part of the 
agreement – SLP against impugned High Court order dismissed – It 
is not open to the High Court to direct specific performance of a part 
of contract except otherwise provided in sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) 
of Section 12 – Power of the court to grant partial relief, from the very 
language of Section 12(3) is discretionary, to be exercised keeping 
in view the facts and circumstances of each case and the rights and 
interests of the parties involved – Meaning of ‘unable to perform’ 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
719
Vijay Prabhu v. S.T. Lajapathie & Ors.
and ‘considerable part’ in Section 12(3) discussed – Section 12(3) 
can be invoked only where the terms of contract permit segregation 
of rights and interests of parties in the property – In view of the 
specific finding recorded by the courts below that the plaintiff was not 
ready and willing to perform his part of the contract and the plaintiff 
being in default – Plaintiff is not entitled to invoke Section 12(3) – 
Amount deposited in Trial Court as refund of earnest money to be 
refunded to the petitioner/plaintiff with the accumulated interest.  
[Paras 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15]
Claim for grant of benefit under Section 12(3) – Raised for the 
first time before High Court in first appeal – Held, relinquishment 
of claim to further performance of the remaining part of the 
contract and all rights to compensation can be made at any 
stage of litigation:
Held: Claim for grant of benefit under Section 12(3) of the Act 
rightly not rejected by High Court on the simple ground that it 
was not made at the trial stage and had been made for the first 
time at the appellate stage – Relinquishment can be made at any 
stage of the litigation including the appellate stage – Claim cannot 
also be rejected on the short ground that it was not incorporated 
in the plaint or was not set forth in writing before the Trial Court. 
[Paras 18, 19, 20 and 21]
Case Law Cited
Jaswinder Kaur (Now Deceased) through her Legal Representatives 
and Others v. Gurmeet Singh and Others reported [2017] 5 SCR 
430 : (2017) 12 SCC 810; Kalyanpur Lime Works v. State of Bihar 
reported [1954] 1 SCR 958 : AIR 1954 SC 165; Waryam Singh v. 
Gopi Chand, AIR 1930 Lah 34; Ram Niwas v. Smt. Omkari and 
Another, AIR 1983 All 310 – relied on.
List of Acts
Specific Relief Act, 1963.
List of Keywords
Suit for specific performance; Specific performance of part of 
contract; Section 12 of Specific Relief Act; Ready and willing; Partial 
relief; Discretionary power; Relinquishment of claim; Benefit under 
Section 12(3) of the Act; Stage of making claim.
720
Supreme Court Reports
Case Arising From
EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Petition for 
Special Leave To Appeal (C) No. 25246 of 2023
From the Judgment and Order dated 24.03.2023 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras in AS No. 211 of 2013
Appearances for Parties
S Nagamuthu, Sr. Adv., Namit Saxena, Advs. for the Petitioner.
Balaji Srinivasan, Ms. Harsha Tripathi, Advs. for the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
We have heard Mr. S. Nagamuthu, the learned Senior counsel 
appearing for the petitioner (original plaintiff) and Mr. Balaji Srinivasan, 
the learned counsel appearing for the respondents (original 
defendants).
2.	
This petition arises from the judgment and order passed by the High 
Court of Judicature at Madras dated 24.03.2023 in Appeal Suit No. 
211 of 2013 by which the High Court dismissed the appeal and 
thereby affirmed the judgment and decree passed by the District 
Judge of Nilgiris at Udhagamandalam dated 18.02.2010 in Original 
Suit No. 45 of 2008. It appears from the materials on record that 
the petitioner herein (original plaintiff) instituted Original Suit No. 
45 of 2008 seeking specific performance of the agreement dated 
07.11.2005 and for delivery of possession of the suit property. In the 
alternative, he prayed for Rs. 60,00,000/- with interest at 12 per cent 
per annum towards the damages from the date of filing of the suit. 
3.	
The Trial Court rejected the prayer for specific performance and 
directed that the amount of Rs. 20,00,000/- paid by the plaintiff to 
the defendants towards the earnest money be refunded with interest 
at 12 per cent per annum.
4.	
The Trial Court framed the following issues:
“1. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of specific 
performance of sale agreement dated 07.11.2005 with 
modifications as prayed by him?
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
721
Vijay Prabhu v. S.T. Lajapathie & Ors.
2. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to possession of the suit 
property described in the plaint schedule excluding the 
portion in the possession of the tenants?
3. In the alternative, whether the plaintiff is entitled to 
refund of the advance amount of Rs.20,00,000/- and for 
damages to a tune of Rs.40,00,000/- from the defendants?
4. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to claim interest at the 
rate of 12% p.a. on the above amounts? (end of the 6th 
page in original) 
5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to charge over the suit 
property for the above amounts as claimed by him?
6. To what other reliefs the plaintiff is entitled?”
5.	
The Trial Court recorded a finding that the plaintiff was not ready 
and willing to perform his part of the contract. Besides, the plaintiff 
had failed to plead and prove that he has suffered damages.
6.	
The High Court while deciding the appeals framed the following 
points for its determination:
“(1) Whether the plaintiff was ready and willing to perform 
his part of the agreement of sale dated 07.11.2005?
(2) Whether the plaintiff can seek to invoke Sec.12 of the 
Specific Relief Act, 1963?
(3) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the discretionary and 
equitable relief of specific performance?
(4) Whether the plaintiff, in the event of not being entitled 
to the relief of specific performance, would be alternatively 
entitled to the relief of damages and refund of advance to 
the tune Rs.40,00,000/- and Rs.20,00,000/- respectively?”
7.	
The High Court in Para 35 while discussing Section 12 of the Specific 
Relief Act (for short, “the Act”) has observed as under:-
“35. Thus, when the plaintiff has chosen to waive only one 
of the obligations that remained unfulfilled at the end of 
the defendants, it is not open to the plaintiff to seek shelter 
U/s.12 and claim specific performance of the part of the 
agreement of sale in his favour. Interestingly, it is also 
seen that apart from seeking relief of specific performance, 
722
Supreme Court Reports
the plaintiff has also made a claim for damages besides 
refund of advance. Thus, the plaintiff does not qualify 
to invoke clause (ii) of Sub-Section (3) to Sec.12, when 
admittedly, he has not relinquished “all claims” and when 
he approaches the Court seeking damages. This Court 
also holds that Sec.12(3) is only a discretionary relief, 
which can be granted to the plaintiff, depending on peculiar 
facts and circumstances of the case. In the opinion of 
this Court, Sec.12(3) cannot be invoked where the terms 
of the contract are not capable of being segregated. In 
the instant case, we do not find that the agreement of 
sale can be compartmentalised in order to grant specific 
performance of only a part of the agreement of sale. It 
is also seen that A.S.Nos.211 and 355 of 2013 mandate 
of Sec.12 is very clear in so far as payment of the whole 
of the consideration. Admittedly, in the instant case, the 
plaintiff has paid only a sum of Rs.20,00,000/- and a 
sum of Rs.64,00,000/- was still outstanding. Unless the 
plaintiff’s pay or has paid the sum of Rs.64,00,000/- he 
was not even justified in invoking the part performance of 
the agreement of sale by resorting to Sec.12 of the Act.”
8.	
The learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner (plaintiff) 
reiterated that his client is entitled to the benefit of the provisions 
of Section 12(3) of the Specific Relief Act (for short, “the Act”) and 
the High Court has not appreciated this aspect of the matter in its 
true perspective.
9.	
Section 12 of the Act:
“12. Specific performance of part of contract.—(1) Except 
as otherwise hereinafter provided in this section, the court 
shall not direct the specific performance of a part of a 
contract.
(2) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the 
whole of his part of it, but the part which must be left 
unperformed by only a small proportion to the whole in 
value and admits of compensation in money, the court may, 
at the suit of either party, direct the specific performance of 
so much of the contract as can be performed, and award 
compensation in money for the deficiency.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
723
Vijay Prabhu v. S.T. Lajapathie & Ors.
(3) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the 
whole of his part of it, and the part which must be left 
unperformed either—
(a) forms a considerable part of the whole, though 
admitting of compensation in money; or
(b) does not admit of compensation in money;
he is not entitled to obtain a decree for specific 
performance; but the court may, at the suit of other 
party, direct the party in default to perform specifically 
so much of his part of the contract as he can perform, 
if the other party—
(i) in a case falling under clause (a), pays or 
has paid the agreed consideration for the whole 
of the contract reduced by the consideration for 
the part which must be left unperformed and in 
a case falling under clause (b), pays or has paid 
the consideration for the whole of the contract 
without any abatement; and
(ii) in either case, relinquishes all claims to the 
performance of the remaining part of the contract 
and all right to compensation, either for the 
deficiency or for the loss or damage sustained 
by him through the default of the defendant.
(4) When a part of a contract which, taken by itself, can 
and ought to be specifically performed, stands on a 
separate and independent footing from another part of the 
same contract which cannot or ought not to be specifically 
performed, the court may direct specific performance of 
the former part.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a party 
to a contract shall be deemed to be unable to perform 
the whole of his part of it if a portion of its subject-matter 
existing at the date of the contract has ceased to exist at 
the time of its performance.”
10.	 A bare perusal of the aforesaid provision contained in Section 12 of 
the Act makes it clear that it is not open to the High Court to direct 
724
Supreme Court Reports
specific performance of a part of contract except otherwise provided 
in the section in absence of any of the exigencies available under 
the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of Section 12 so as 
to decree the suit.
11.	 The words ‘unable to perform’ suggest that the sub-section is 
applicable only when the party cannot for any reason perform the 
whole of what he has promised. The inability may arise by any 
cause whatsoever including any statutory limitations. The inability 
to perform may arise by—
(i) deficiency in quantity of the subject-matter, or
(ii) variance in quality, or
(iii) defect in title; or
(iv) some legal prohibition; or
(v) other causes.
12.	 The expression ‘considerable part’ implies that the part which will 
be left unperformed is either large as regards quantity or as regards 
quality. In other words, it is material and not insignificant, so that 
a reasonable objection can be taken by the promisee to accept 
performance. The phrase ‘does not admit of compensation’ implies 
that there is no data for ascertaining a fair and reasonable amount 
as the money value of the difference between what can be performed 
and the express subject-matter of the contract. The amount need not 
be mathematically accurate. If a reasonable estimate of the amount 
as the money value can be made, it will not be a case where the 
compensation is unascertainable.
13.	 The power to grant partial relief, from the very language of Section 12(3) 
of the Act is discretionary with the court to be exercised keeping in 
view the facts and circumstances of each case and the rights and 
interests of the parties involved. Section 12(3) of the Act can be 
invoked only where the terms of contract permit segregation of rights 
and interests of parties in the property.
14.	 In view of the specific finding recorded by the courts below that the 
plaintiff was not ready and willing to perform his part of the contract 
and the plaintiff being in default he could not be said to be entitled 
to invoke Section 12(3) of the Act also.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
725
Vijay Prabhu v. S.T. Lajapathie & Ors.
15.	 In the aforesaid context, we may refer to a decision of this Court in 
Jaswinder Kaur (Now Deceased) through her Legal Representatives 
and Others v. Gurmeet Singh and Others reported in (2017) 12 SCC 
810, wherein this Court observed in paras 19, 20 and 21 respectively 
as under:
“19. In Abdul Haq v. Mohd. Yehia Khan reported in AIR 
1924 Pat 81, the Court observed that the Court will not as 
a general rule compel specific performance of a contract 
unless it can execute the whole contract. It is not a case 
where the entire contract is not capable of performance. 
Section 12 encompasses provisions in respect of a claim 
for specific performance of part of a contract. Sections 
14 and 17 of the old Act have been amalgamated with 
modifications and the explanation based on Section 13 
of the repealed Act together, the law is stated with clarity 
under Section 12 of the Act.
20. Section 12(1) of the Act provides that specific 
performance can be granted on part of a contract only 
in the circumstances mentioned in the section. Section 
12(2) of the Act deals with breach the contract if a party 
is unable to perform the whole of its part and such 
part bears a small proportion to the whole in value and 
admits compensation in money. The expression “unable 
to perform” in Section 12(2) of the Act for instance would 
mean that a part of the property destroyed after contract 
or act of God or an act by which it would cease to exist. 
In such a case party to a contract shall be deemed to be 
unable to perform the whole or its part of the contract. 
Such a person would come within the words “party in 
default”. The inability to perform may arise by deficiency 
in quantity of subject-matter or deficiencies or some legal 
prohibition or such other causes. None of such causes is 
present in the instant case.
21. Section 12 of the Act does not apply where the inability 
to perform specific performance on part of contract arises 
because of the plaintiff’s own conduct as held in Abdul 
Rahim v. Maidhar Gazi reported in AIR 1928 Cal 584. In 
Graham v. Krishna Chunder Dey reported in AIR 1925 PC 
726
Supreme Court Reports
45, it has been laid down that the Explanation in the section 
exhaust all the circumstances in which part-performance 
can be granted. Section 12(2) of the Act deals with the 
situation where a party is unable to perform and such 
part is only a small proportion in value and capable of 
compensation in form of money. It was not a case covered 
in Section 12(2) of the Act at all. Under Section 12(3) of 
the Act party in default is entitled to specific performance 
on payment of whole consideration or for the part left 
unperformed but here in the instant case the plaintiff being 
in default could not be said to be entitled to invoke Section 
12(3) of the Act also.”
16.	 There is one another issue, we must look into and clarify. In para 
29, the High Court has observed as under:
“29. Learned Senior counsel for the plaintiff relied on 
Sec.12 of the Act and vehemently contended that the 
plaintiff would be entitled to a decree when the plaintiff 
was willing to relinquish his claims to the performance by 
the defendants, of the remaining part of the agreement of 
sale. This Court at the very outset notices that such a plea 
was never raised before the Trial Court and no grounds 
have also been raised in the memorandum of First Appeal 
in this regard. However, this Court is inclined to deal with 
the elaborate submissions made by the learned Senior 
counsel for the plaintiff touching Sec.12 of the Act.”
(Emphasis supplied)
17.	 Thus, the High Court expressed doubt whether the plea as regards 
Section 12 of the Act if not raised before the Trial Court could have 
been raised for the first time before the High Court in first appeal.
18.	 In the aforesaid context, we may only say that the relinquishment 
of claim to further performance of the remaining part of the contract 
and all rights to compensation can be made at any stage of litigation. 
This was held in Kalyanpur Lime Works v. State of Bihar reported 
in AIR 1954 SC 165. This Court referred with approval to a Division 
Bench decision of the Lahore High Court in Waryam Singh v. Gopi 
Chand, (AIR 1930 Lah 34).
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
727
Vijay Prabhu v. S.T. Lajapathie & Ors.
19.	 In the case of Kalyanpur Lime Works (supra) the plaintiff had sued the 
State of Bihar for specific performance of a contract for lease. It was 
found that an earlier lease in favour of another company was in force 
and could not be forfeited and, therefore, the Government was not in 
a position to grant lease of the property to the Lime company. The 
Lime Company made an application at the appellate stage claiming 
benefit of the provisions of old Section 15 and prayed for grant of 
lease for a period of five years which remained after the expiry of 
the period of lease of the other company. This Court observed:
“Relinquishment of the claim to further performance can 
be made at any stage of the litigation.”
Thus, Waryam Singh’s case was referred to with approval. However, 
the benefit of old Section 15 was not allowed on other considerations.
20.	 In Waryam Singh’s case the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 respectively 
had agreed to sell 200 Kanals of specified land, but later on it was 
found that they were owners of only two-third of that land. In the 
Trial Court the plaintiff insisted on specific performance of the whole 
contract and prayed that the defendants be asked to make good the 
deficiency from the other land belonging to them. At the time of the 
arguments the plaintiff had moved an application claiming benefit 
of the old Section 15 in case it was held that the defendants were 
incompetent to sell the whole of the land. The Division Bench held:
“It is open to the plaintiff to relinquish his claim to any 
part of the property in suit on the conditions specified in 
Section 15 at any time before the suit is finally decided 
by the Court of appeal.”
21.	 Thus, the position of law is that relinquishment could be made at any 
stage of the litigation including the appellate stage. The claim of the 
plaintiff appellant for grant of benefit under Section 12(3) of the Act 
was, therefore, rightly not rejected by the High Court on the simple 
ground that it was not made at the trial stage and had been made 
for the first time at the appellate stage. In our view the claim can 
also not be rejected on the short ground that it was not incorporated 
in the plaint or was not set forth in writing before the Trial Court. 
[See: Ram Niwas v. Smt. Omkari and another : AIR 1983 All 310]
22.	 We are of the view that no error not to speak of any error of law 
could be said to have been committed by the High Court in passing 
the impugned order.
728
Supreme Court Reports
23.	 In such circumstances, referred to above, the Special Leave Petition 
fails and is hereby dismissed.
24.	 The amount of Rs.20,00,000/- which came to be deposited by the 
defendants in the Trial Court in the form of refund of the earnest 
money to the original plaintiff must have been invested by the Court 
concerned with any bank by way of fixed deposit receipt, the said 
amount shall be refunded to the petitioner – herein (original plaintiff) 
within a period of four weeks from today with the accumulated interest 
as awarded by the Court below.
25.	 Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
Result of the case: SLP dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Adeeba Mujahid, Hony. Associate Editor 
(Verified by: Shibani Ghosh, Adv.)