[2025] 5 S.C.R. 409 : 2025 INSC 436
Shri. Masaidevi Vividh Karyakari Sahakari Seva Sanstha 
Maryadit Warewadi 
v. 
The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 4669 of 2025)
02 April 2025
[Vikram Nath and Prasanna B. Varale,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court rightly set aside the orders passed by the 
State directing registration of the appellant-society.
Headnotes†
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 – ss.4, 6 – 
Societies which may be registered – Conditions of registration– 
Appellant-society applied for registration of proposed society 
as a new Primary Agricultural Credits Co-operative Society – 
Scrutiny Committee rejected the application mainly on the 
ground of unsubstantiated financial viability of the appellant – 
Order set aside by State, registration directed – Order set 
aside by High Court– Sustainability:
Held: Impugned order upheld – Under ss.4 and 6, the economic 
viability of the society is a pre-requisite or basic condition for grant 
of registration to the society – Scrutiny Committee being an expert 
Committee was established specifically for the inspection of financial 
ability of a prospective society – It found that there was nothing in the 
proposal submitted by the appellant to substantiate the conditions 
of financial health as provided in the Government Resolution dated 
14.02.2017 – There was no material on record before the Committee 
to show that the appellant was in a position to comply with the 
pre-requisites as referred therein – While deciding the appeal, 
State completely ignored the basic criteria or the pre-requisite for 
the registration of society, i.e. its economic viability, laid down by 
the State itself through its various Government Resolutions – By 
relaxing the pre-requisite condition relating to financial viability, the 
* Author
410
Supreme Court Reports
State allowed the registration of the society frustrating the very 
object of the Act – Committee had rightly rejected the application 
for registration – State unjustifiably interfered in the Committee’s 
order – High Court rightly set aside the order of the State. [Paras 
17, 18, 22, 25, 27-29, 32, 34, 35]
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 – s.4:
Held: The constitution of the Scrutiny Committee and the 
examination of the proposal by the Committee is a vital part of the 
Policy Directives of the State Government which is required to be 
complied with conditions u/s.4 – If a society is unable to comply 
with the pre-condition or prerequisite in regard to the economic 
viability of the society, allowing the registration of such a society 
which might not even be able to function, may adversely affect its 
members ultimately, frustrating the very object of the establishment 
of the said society – Thus, ignoring the findings of the Committee 
and allowing the registration of the society led to an unjustifiable 
interference in the Committee’s Order – Further, State Government 
may use its discretion for relaxation of conditions – However, such 
discretion cannot be used to frustrate the very object of the Act – 
Power of relaxing the necessary pre-requisites could have been 
made only through a Government Resolution and not at the whims 
of the State in an appeal which essentially led to by-passing the 
eligibility criteria set out by the Government through its multiple 
Resolutions. [Paras 30-32]
List of Acts
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960.
List of Keywords
Sections 4 and 6 of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 
1960; Registration of proposed society; Primary Agricultural Credits 
Co-operative Society (PACCS); Financial viability of the Society; 
Economic viability; Basic criteria or pre-requisite/pre-condition for 
the registration of society; Scrutiny Committee; Expert Committee; 
Government Resolutions; Registered co-operative society; Eligibility 
criteria of the applicant societies; Locus standi; Financially viable; 
Discretion for relaxation of conditions; Frustrate the object of Act; 
Patent illegality.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
411
Shri. Masaidevi Vividh Karyakari Sahakari Seva Sanstha  
Maryadit Warewadi v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4669 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 05.01.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in WP No. 8654 of 2023
With
Civil Appeal Nos. 4670, 4671, 4672, 4673, 4674, 4675, 4676, 
4677, 4678, 4679, 4680, 4681, 4682, 4683, 4684, 4685, 4686, 
4687, 4688, 4689, 4690, 4691, 4692, 4693, 4694, 4695, 4696, 
4697, 4698, 4699, 4700, 4701, 4702, 4703, 4704, 4705, 4706, 
4707, 4708, 4709, 4710 and 4711 of 2025.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Shekhar Naphade, Vinay Navare, Sr. Advs., Omkar Jayant 
Deshpande, Shashibhushan P. Adgaonkar, Mrs. Pradnya S 
Adgaonkar.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Ms. Madhavi Goradia Divan, Ardhendumali Kumar Prasad,  
Sr. Advs., Makarand D Adkar, Pravin Waman Satale, Shantanu M 
Adkar, Rishabh Jain, Shubham Saigal, Akshay Kumar, Deepesh 
Singh, Rajiv Shankar Dvivedi, S K Sarkar, Bhushan, Aaditya 
Aniruddha Pande, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Bharat Bagla, Sourav 
Singh, Aditya Krishna, Ms. Preet S. Phanse, Adarsh Dubey.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Prasanna B. Varale, J:
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The challenge in the present appeals is to the common order dated 
05.01.2024 in Writ Petition No. 8654/2023 and 42 other connected 
matters, whereby the High Court of Judicature at Bombay allowed 
the petitions preferred by the respondent no. 6 herein and in other 
connected matters and set aside the orders passed by the State of 
Maharashtra directing registration of the appellant-societies.
412
Supreme Court Reports
3.	
For the sake of brevity and as the legal issue involved is the same, 
we are referring to the facts of the W.P. No. 8654 of 2023 resulting 
into SLP (C) No. 4090 of 2024. The factual background is that on 
13.01.2023, the appellant-society herein filed an application to the 
Respondent-Assistant Registrar for getting permission for registration 
of proposed society as a new Primary Agricultural Credit Co-operative 
Society (hereinafter ‘PACCS’), as well as for opening a bank account. A 
scrutiny was done by the Scrutiny Committee (hereinafter ‘Committee’) 
wherein the application filed by the appellant-society was rejected 
on 13.04.2023. The reasons given by the Committee for rejection 
of application are reproduced below:
“1. The District Deputy Registrar and Divisional Joint 
Registrar, Kolhapur have not verified and ascertained as 
to whether the Revenue village of the aforesaid proposed 
society is within the purview of the existing society. 
2. The information as to whether the Promoters – members 
of the proposed society are the members of other existing 
societies or not, has not been verified and submitted. 
3. The Chief Promoter has not verified and ascertained 
crop-wise cultivated area of the Promoters – members in 
the proposed society as mentioned in the Crops Sowing 
Register. 
4. The Kolhapur District Central Co-operative Bank has 
not given undertaking in respect of providing loan as per 
it’s Crop-Loan Policy, to the Promoters – members of the 
proposed society or has not annexed the Undertaking to 
the effect that apart from the Kolhapur District Central 
Co-operative Bank, other Nationalised Banks or other 
Financial Institutions are going to provide loan to the 
proposed society. 
5. The existing Credit Co-operative Society for the Revenue 
village of the proposed Society, has not issued No- 
objection certificate to the proposed Society for registration. 
6. The existing Society has not submitted information 
about member-wise loans provided to the members to be 
transferred to the proposed Society. 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
413
Shri. Masaidevi Vividh Karyakari Sahakari Seva Sanstha  
Maryadit Warewadi v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
7. The extracts of entries from the Crops Sowing Register 
and 7/12 extract in respect of the lands of the Promoters – 
members included in the Registration Proposal, have not 
been annexed to the Proposal for Registration. Therefore, 
the probable distribution of loan proposed by the Society 
cannot be ascertained.
8. The Chief Promoter has not submitted alongwith the 
proposal, the information as to whether the Promoters – 
members to be included in the proposed society are 
included in other existing society or not. 
9. The self-explanatory opinion of the Divisional Joint 
Registrar, District Deputy Registrar and Taluka Assistant 
Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Kolhapur, as to whether 
said society shall be financially viable after registration or 
not has not been submitted. 
10. The Chief Promoter of the proposed Society, on the 
basis of the certificate issued by the Gaon Kamgar Talathi, 
has certified that agricultural loan of the approximate 
amount of more than Rs.150.00 lakhs will be provided 
however, he has not enclosed with the proposal, the 
documents in support of providing the said loan and the 
documents for verification thereof and therefore, it cannot 
be ascertained that after registration, the proposed society 
will be able to provide loan of the amount of more than 
Rs.150.00 lakhs. 
11. The loan provided by the existing society within the 
area of operation of the proposed society is less than the 
amount of Rs.150.00 lakhs and therefore, existing society 
itself is not financially viable. Therefore, it would not be 
appropriate to allow registration of another society of the 
same type with same objectives within the area of operation 
of the existing society which itself is not financially viable. 
12. On the basis of the documents in the Registration 
Proposal, the Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies, 
Tal. Shahuwadi, under his letter dated 11.04.2023, has 
appraised that the proposed society will not be financially 
viable and therefore, as per the instructions mentioned in 
414
Supreme Court Reports
the Government Resolution, it would not be appropriate 
to grant permission for registration of the said society. 
13. Though the caveat has been filed in respect of the 
registration of the proposed society, as the society is not 
complying with the criteria mentioned in the Government 
Resolution dated 23.09.2013 and as the said proposal is not 
financially viable, the proposal of the aforesaid proposed 
Society has been rejected and therefore, the question to 
give an opportunity of hearing to the Caveator at the level 
of the Scrutiny Committee, does not arise at all.
14. Thus, it is found that the existing society itself is not 
financially viable. Therefore, it would not be appropriate· 
to allow registration of another society of the same type 
with same objectives within the area of operation of the 
existing society which itself is not financially viable.
Hence, considering the aforesaid aspects and on perusing 
the documents in the proposal, it does not appear that after 
registration, the proposed society will be financially viable 
in future. Similarly, as per the instructions mentioned in 
the Government Resolution, as the proposed society is 
not complying with the financial criteria required for the 
registration thereof, it is unanimously resolved that the 
registration proposal should be rejected.”
4.	
Being aggrieved by the order of the Committee, the appellant-
society preferred an appeal under Section 152 of the Maharashtra 
Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 (hereinafter ‘the 1960 Act’) before 
the State. Respondent No.6 herein, who is a member of Salashi 
Vividh Karyakari Sahakari (Vikas) Seva Saunstha Maryadit Salashi, 
a registered co-operative society having its jurisdiction in Salashi and 
Warewadi, District Kolhapur, got himself impleaded as a respondent-
party in the appeal proceedings.
5.	
The Minister, Co-operatives, on behalf of the State, vide its order 
dated 28.06.2023, allowed the appeal filed by the appellant herein 
and, thereby, set aside the Order dated 13.4.2023 passed by the 
Committee. It was also directed to the Respondent-Assistant Registrar 
to register the appellant-society. The reasoning given for allowing 
the appeal is reproduced below:
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
415
Shri. Masaidevi Vividh Karyakari Sahakari Seva Sanstha  
Maryadit Warewadi v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
“The applicant-society has primarily sought an independent 
development society for its independent revenue village, 
based on the directives in the Government Decision and 
its amendment that there should be only one primary 
agricultural credit society in an independent revenue village. 
The Primary Agricultural Credit society of the neighbouring 
village of the applicant-society has not objected to the 
proposal of the applicant-society. It does not happen and 
the ratio of risk assets to capital also does not decrease. 
The applicant-society has argued that as per the lending 
policy of the bank, the loan can be provided as per the 
norms. Moreover, the applicant-society has asserted that 
as per the policy of the Central Government, the applicant-
society can do about 152. types of business other than 
loan distribution and thereby become profitable. It cannot 
be said that it is wrong. Apart from this, it cannot be denied 
that the applicant-society can allocate loans by taking loans 
from self-funds and other banks as well………..
As the village of the applicant-society is hilly area and 
there is no adequate transportation facility, it is difficult and 
troublesome to take membership of a society established 
in another village and go to that village to avail the services 
of the society. Also Primary Agricultural Credit Institutions 
in neighbouring villages are also applicants seem unable to 
avail the services of the society. Therefore, the government 
decision based on the decision dated 16.01.2015 that 
a new agricultural credit society can be registered in a 
separate revenue village; the applicant submits that, the 
proposal for registration filed by the society is reasonable 
and proper……..
However, the intervening-applicant has not submitted any 
figures showing that the cash value of the existing society 
or the ratio of risk assets to the capital would decrease 
after the registration of the applicant society…….
The Respondent no.4 viz The Assistant Registrar has 
checked the records in his office that there is no registered 
primary agricultural credit society in the independent 
revenue village where the applicant-society has jurisdiction. 
416
Supreme Court Reports
Therefore, a report has been given while submitting the 
proposal of. the applicant-society to the senior office that the 
registration of the applicant-society will not adversely affect 
the financial condition of the working primary agricultural 
credit society. Adequate contradiction has not been made 
by the intervention-applicant…….
This means that the registration the applicant-society will 
not adversely affect any existing society. Also, within 3 years 
from the date of registration of the applicant- society, share 
capital of Rs.5/- lakhs and the applicant-society is ready 
to give a guarantee to start a new business in one year.” 
6.	
Aggrieved by the order of the State, the respondent no. 6 herein 
filed a Writ Petition before the High Court of Judicature at Bombay 
praying to set aside the order dated 28.06.2023 passed by the State. 
7.	
The High Court, vide the impugned common order, allowed the 
appeal of the respondent no. 6 herein and observed the following: 
“9. I have perused the impugned order. The Petitioners 
were intervenors before the State Government. Neither 
the issue of locus standi of the Petitioners was raised 
before the State Government nor the State Government 
recorded finding in the impugned order/s that the Petitioners 
do not have any right to object to the registration of the 
contesting Respondents as multipurpose co-operative 
societies. The only contention which was raised was that 
due to registration of the proposed societies there will not 
be any adverse impact on the financial condition of the 
existing societies. 
10. Considering the facts and circumstances and in view 
of the findings recorded by the scrutiny committee, I am 
inclined to accept the submission that the Petitioners who 
are neither existing co-operative societies or members 
of the existing co-operative societies lack locus standi to 
challenge the impugned orders. 
11. As regards merits, the scrutiny committee who is in 
the form of expert body after scrutinising the documents 
filed in support of the application/s made by the contesting 
Respondents has recorded the specific finding that the. 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
417
Shri. Masaidevi Vividh Karyakari Sahakari Seva Sanstha  
Maryadit Warewadi v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
proposed societies would not be financially viable. The 
scrutiny committee has further held that the proposed 
societies do not fulfil the requisite financial parameters laid 
down in the Government Resolution dated 23 September 
2013. There is no finding in the impugned order/s that the 
findings recorded by the scrutiny committee are perverse. 
12. Apart from the above, as per, the Government 
Resolution dated 14 February 2017 it is necessary for the 
proposed societies to have share capital of Rs.5 Lakhs at 
the time of applying for registration. It appears from the 
impugned order/s that the said condition is also relaxed 
on the basis of undertaking of the contesting Respondents 
that they would raise the share capital of Rs.5 Lakhs within 
one/three years from the date of registration of the society. 
13. Considering the overall facts and circumstances, the 
order/s impugned cannot be allowed to stand as the same 
are contrary to proviso to Section 4 of the Maharashtra 
Co-operative Societies Act. 
14. The Petitions are allowed. The order/s impugned in the 
present Petitions are set aside. All consequential actions 
are set aside”
8.	
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order passed 
by the High Court, the appellants are before us.
9.	
We have heard the learned senior counsels and counsels for the 
parties and perused the material on record.
10.	 The arguments advanced by the learned Senior Counsel for the 
appellants are summarised hereunder:
10.1	 That the appellant is the first and only Co-operative society in 
the said Revenue Village, a fact that has been acknowledged 
by the Assistant Registrar as well.
10.2	 That it is practically not possible for any society to have share 
capital of Rs. 5 lakhs at the time of applying for registration. 
In this regard, an undertaking had been submitted by the 
appellant-society that they would raise the required share 
capital of Rs. 5 lakhs within one to three years from the date 
of registration of society and the appellant has also undertaken 
the compliance of this term before this Court.
418
Supreme Court Reports
10.3	 That the appellant-society has made a genuine effort to fulfil 
all the required documents at the time of filing the application 
for registration.
10.4	 That the State in its Order clearly stated that there are multiple 
reasons which can destabilize the financial status of a Society, 
therefore, because of only one parameter i.e. loan distribution 
to the crops, the registration of the society cannot be denied.
10.5	 That the respondent no. 6 does not have any locus-standi to 
challenge the Order passed by the State.
10.6	 That the Society, of which present respondent no. 6 is a 
member, has already given a ‘No-Objection-Certificate’ to the 
present appellant-society and an individual member cannot 
take contrary stand to the society of which he is a member 
until and unless that society passes resolution to that effect.
10.7	 That the High Court, on one hand, accepted that the petitioners 
therein did not hold any locus standi yet, on the other hand, 
allowed the Writ Petition filed by them.
10.8	 That the chart indicating the population of each revenue village, 
submitted by the respondent no. 6, is as per the 2011 census 
and it cannot be ignored that the population in these villages 
must have grown in the past 13-14 years.
10.9	 That any co-operative society can manage 152 kinds of 
businesses apart from giving loan. Therefore, it is unfair to 
ignore all others important aspects which helps a society to 
run successfully.
10.10	That the minimum number of the membership for registration of 
a new society is 75 and the present appellant-society has given 
the list of 150 members. Therefore, the appellant-society is very 
much ahead of the minimum required number of memberships.
11.	 Per contra, the arguments advanced by the learned Senior Counsels 
and counsels for the respondents are stated as below:
11.1	 That the eligibility for the purpose of registration cannot be 
isolated from the impact on an existing society, if any. The 
appellant herein has failed to satisfy the threshold criteria and 
conditions to establish its own viability. 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
419
Shri. Masaidevi Vividh Karyakari Sahakari Seva Sanstha  
Maryadit Warewadi v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
11.2	 That it is not open to the appellant to now seek to by-pass 
the expert Scrutiny Committee by contending for the very first 
time before this Court that the Committee was constituted 
without any authority and/or it lacks jurisdiction to scrutinize 
the appellant’s proposal for its registration as a PACCS.
11.3	 That Scrutiny Committee’s Order shows its in-depth 
examination of the appellants’ proposals and the Committee’s 
detailed findings which militate against the eligibility of the 
appellants for registration.
11.4	 That the order passed by the State is ex-facie perverse and 
unsustainable as it has allowed the appellants’ registration 
without fulfilling the most basic and mandatory pre-requisites 
for registration.
11.5	 That the respondent no. 6, being a member of an existing 
society, is vitally affected inasmuch as the registration of the 
appellant-society could lead to destabilizing the existing society 
and even lead to its closure.
11.6	 That the performance of credit/loan disbursement of existing 
primary credit cooperative societies would show that even they 
are hardly in a position to achieve the minimum target fixed 
by the Government Resolution and, in such circumstances, 
establishment of any proposed Credit Cooperative Society 
in the adjacent village would have disastrous effect on the 
existing credit co-operative societies.
11.7	 That the NOC relied upon by the appellant which is alleged 
to be given by the society, of which respondent no. 6 is a 
member, is unauthorised and there is no mention of it being 
issued to the appellant in record and proceedings of the 
abovementioned society.
11.8	 That the appellant has approached this Court with unclean 
hands as it is obvious that the appellant has sought to artificially 
inflate its membership by showing dead persons so as to show a 
membership with larger land holdings in order to meet the viability 
criteria. This conduct shows the mala fides of the appellant.
12.	 Before delving into the analysis of the facts of the case, we find it 
pertinent to mention the relevant provisions of the 1960 Act and the 
Government Resolutions dated 23.09.2013 and 14.02.2017.
420
Supreme Court Reports
13.	 Chapter II of the 1960 Act deals with the registration wherein Section 
4 and Section 6 are the specific relevant provisions for the purpose 
of this matter and are reproduced as below:
“4. Societies which may be registered:— A society, which 
has as its objects the promotion of the economic interests 
or general welfare of its members or of the public, in 
accordance with co-operative principles or a society 
established with the object of facilitating the operations 
of any such society, may be registered under this Act:
Provided that, no society shall be registered if it is likely to 
be economically unsound, or the registration of which may 
have an adverse effect on development’ of the co-operative 
movement, or the registration of which may be contrary 
to the policy directives which the State Government may, 
from time to time, issue.
6. Conditions of registration:-
(1) No society, other than a federal society, shall be 
registered under this Act,. Unless it consists of at least ten 
persons or such higher number of persons as the Registrar 
may, having regard to the objects and economic viability of 
a society and development of the Co-operative movement, 
determine from time to time for a class of societies (each 
of such persons being a member of a different family), 
who are qualified to be members under this Act, and who 
reside in the area of operation of the society:
Provided that, a lift irrigation society consisting of less than 
ten but of five or more such persons may be registered 
under this Act.
…”
[Emphasis supplied]
14.	 Now, it will be useful to refer to the Government Resolutions to which 
reference is made in the impugned judgment of the Hight Court.
15.	 The Government Resolution dated 23.09.2013, which has been 
produced as Annexure P-1 before us, sets out the newly revised 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
421
Shri. Masaidevi Vividh Karyakari Sahakari Seva Sanstha  
Maryadit Warewadi v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
criteria for registration of PACCS and the revised condition nos. 4 
and 5 read as follows:
“Condition No.4: The number of members (accounting 
members) of a newly registered primary agricultural credit 
cooperative should be at least 75.
Condition No. 5.: For the purpose of scrutiny of the 
proposal of primary agricultural credit cooperative society, 
committee will be formed as under mentioned for the 
purpose of inspection of financial ability.”
16.	 The Government of Maharashtra issued another Government 
Resolution dated 14.02.2017, in furtherance of which the Government 
Corrigendum was issued, and it reads as follows:
“1) There should preferably be only one primary agricultural 
credit cooperative in a revenue village. However, in villages 
where there is scope for registration of more than one 
society, taking into account other criteria of economic 
viability, more than one society can be registered.
1A) A Scheduled Primary Agricultural Credit Co-operative 
Society before its registration; it must have a minimum of 
Rs.5 lakh share capital and it is essential to do so.
….”
[Emphasis supplied]
17.	 A conjoint reading of Section 4 and condition No.1 of Section 6 of 
the 1960 Act makes it very clear that the economic viability of the 
society is a pre-requisite or basic condition for grant of registration 
to the society.
18.	 Further, condition No. 5 of the Government Resolution dated 
23.09.2013 makes it unambiguous that a Scrutiny Committee was 
to be set up/established specifically for the purpose of inspection of 
financial ability of a prospective society.
19.	 Additionally, Criteria 1A of the Government Resolution dated 
14.02.2017, further clarifies the said pre-requisite of economic viability 
of the societies by explicitly stating that a minimum of Rs. 5 lakhs 
share capital is to be maintained by applicant society. 
422
Supreme Court Reports
20.	 It is in the backdrop of the above referred provisions of the 1960 
Act as well as the Government Resolutions that we have to peruse 
the order of the Scrutiny Committee which examined the proposal 
of the appellant-societies for registration. 
21.	 The Committee in the opening part of its minutes records as follows:
“…to scruitinize the registration proposal of this scheduled 
society and to check the financial capability…”
22.	 This supports the respondents’ contention that it was the duty of the 
Committee to check the financial capability of the appellant-societies 
and it was an expert Committee set up specifically to check the 
eligibility criteria of the applicant societies. 
23.	 We have already referred to the reasons assigned by the Scrutiny 
Committee for rejection of the application in earlier part of this 
judgment at Paragraph 3. The Paragraphs 4, 10 and 11 of the 
Committee’s order therein noted the findings of the Committee with 
regard to the appellant-society not meeting the financial requirements 
in the form of a lack of bank guarantee, lack of documents to support 
provision of bank loan etc. It was in furtherance of these specific 
findings that the Committee in clear words noted that: 
“the petitioner society fails to comply with the criteria of 
economic viability and state it would not be advisable to 
establish society of the same type and with the same 
purpose in the area of operation of an unprofitable working 
society” 
24.	 Thereafter, the State while deciding the appeal seems to be impressed 
by the appellant’s submission that the registration of the proposed 
society is not adversely affecting the existing society as there was 
no objection raised by the existing society.
25.	 In our considered opinion, the State, while deciding the appeal, 
completely ignored the basic criteria or the pre-requisite for the 
registration of society i.e. the economic viability of the society. The 
said criteria and pre-requisites had been laid down by the State itself 
through its various Government Resolutions. As such, it could not 
have taken a decision contrary to its own guidelines.
26.	 It will not be out of place to state that the State was much impressed 
by the submissions advanced on behalf of the appellant-society that 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
423
Shri. Masaidevi Vividh Karyakari Sahakari Seva Sanstha  
Maryadit Warewadi v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
any Cooperative Society can manage 152 kinds of businesses apart 
from giving loans. 
27.	 However, the appellant had made such submissions without placing 
any supporting material on record before the Scrutiny Committee to 
show as to what kind of other 152 businesses the appellant-society 
would undertake and how the appellant-society is economically viable. 
Yet, the State accepted the hypothetical claim of the appellant-society. 
In our opinion, in doing so, the State has essentially ignored the 
aspect of economic viability. 
28.	 Admittedly, the Committee had found that there was nothing in 
the proposal submitted by the appellant-society to substantiate 
the conditions of financial health as provided in the Government 
Resolution dated 14.02.2017. There was merely a bald statement that 
the Kolhapur District Central Cooperative Bank is going to support 
the proposed appellant-society but, as noted by the Committee, 
there was no letter of undertaking that was attached to that effect.
29.	 Thus, it is apparent that there was absolutely no material on record 
before the Committee to show that the appellant-society was in 
a position to comply with the pre-requisites as referred to in the 
Government Resolution dated 14.02.2017. The Committee had, 
therefore, rightly rejected the application for registration.
30.	 It may not be out of place to state that if a society is unable to comply 
with the pre-condition or pre-requisite in regard to the economic 
viability of the society, allowing the registration of such a society 
which might not even be able to function, it may adversely affect 
the members of the society and, ultimately, it would be frustrating 
the very object of the establishment of the said society.
31.	 It must be noted that the constitution of the Committee and the 
examination of the proposal by the Committee is a vital part of the 
Policy Directives of the State Government which is required to be 
complied with conditions under Section 4 of the 1960 Act. Therefore, 
ignoring the findings of the Committee and allowing the registration 
of the society when the appellants have been unable to point out 
any perversity in the said findings shall lead to an unjustifiable 
interference in the Committee’s Order.
32.	 Further, it must be noted that the State Government may use its 
discretion for relaxation of conditions. However, such a discretion 
424
Supreme Court Reports
cannot be used to frustrate the very object of the Act. Such a power 
of relaxing the necessary pre-requisites could have been made 
only through the means of a Government Resolution and not at the 
whims of the State in an appeal which essentially led to by-passing 
the eligibility criteria set out by the Government through its multiple 
Resolutions. Once such an eligibility standard has been set out by 
the Government, the only proper route to introduce any alteration or 
relaxation of these conditions would have been through a subsequent 
Government Resolution. In the present case, by relaxing the pre-
requisite condition relating to financial viability, the State allowed the 
registration of the society, which in our opinion, resulted in nothing 
but frustrating the very object of the Act.
33.	 Lastly, with respect to the locus standi of the respondent no. 6, such 
an argument by the appellants shall not restrain interference by this 
Court or the High Court in the matter when there is patent illegality 
in the State’s order which requires interference by the Courts of law.
34.	 Therefore, considering all these aspects, we are unable to find 
any fault in the order passed by the High Court. The High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay has rightly allowed the petition and set aside 
the order passed by the State.
35.	 Accordingly, the appeals stand dismissed, and the impugned order 
of the High Court is upheld.
36.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall be disposed of accordingly.
37.	 No order as to cost. 
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey