[2025] 7 S.C.R. 346 : 2025 INSC 805
Union of India 
v. 
M/s Kamakhya Transport Pvt. Ltd. Etc. Etc.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 7376-7379 of 2025)
05 June 2025
[Sanjay Karol* and Prashant Kumar Mishra, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the Courts below had rightly held that the Railway authorities 
could not have raised the demand notice after the delivery of goods.
Headnotes†
Railways Act, 1989 – s.66 – Power to require statement 
relating to the description of goods – Appellant raised demand 
notices alleging misdeclaration of goods, for consignments 
sent through the Railways – Respondents paid the demands 
raised but sought refund of the amount paid contending that 
the demand notices issued after the delivery of the goods 
were illegal – Claim allowed by Railway Tribunal – Appeals 
dismissed by High Court – Interference with:
Held: A consignee/owner of goods/person having charge of goods 
who has brought goods for the purpose of carriage has to give the 
Railway authorities a written statement regarding the description 
of the goods, to enable them to charge the appropriate rate of 
carriage – Under sub-sec.(4), if the statement is found to be 
materially false, the Railway authority is empowered to charge the 
goods at the required rate – No reference is made to the stage 
at which such a charge can be made, i.e., either before or after 
delivery – Thus, the legislative intent is to permit levy of charge 
under this Section, at either stage and not at a specific one – High 
Court erred in holding that penal charges can only be applied prior 
to the delivery of goods – Impugned order set aside – Railway 
Claims Tribunal Act, 1987. [Paras 14, 18, 20]
Case Law Cited
Jagjit Cotton Textile Mills v. Chief Commercial Superintendent N.R. 
and Ors. [1998] 2 SCR 1065 : (1998) 5 SCC 126 – referred to.
Union of India v. Megha Technical & Engineers Pvt. Limited, Decision 
of Gauhati High Court in W.A. Nos. 71-74 of 2013 – referred to.
* Author
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
347
Union of India v. M/s Kamakhya Transport Pvt. Ltd. Etc. Etc.
List of Acts
Railways Act, 1989; Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987.
List of Keywords
Description of goods; Misdeclaration of goods; Consignments sent 
through the Railways; Demand notices; Demand notices issued 
after the delivery of the goods; Goods for carriage; Appropriate 
rate of carriage; Levy of charge; Stage of levy of charge; Before 
or after delivery; Railway authorities; Railway Claims Tribunal; 
Refund; Punitive charges after delivery of goods; Consignee; 
Owner of goods; Person having charge of goods; Penal charges; 
Prior to the delivery of goods.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 7376-7379 
of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.12.2021 passed by the 
Gauhati High Court in MFA Nos. 80 and 57 of 2016 and MFA Nos. 
29 and 28 of 2017
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
K.M. Nataraj, A.S.G., Amrish Kumar, Mrs. Ameyavikrama Thanvi, 
Vatsal Joshi, B.k.satija, Chinmayee Chandra, Gaurang Bhushan, 
Sudarshan Lamba.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Divyansh Rathi, Himanshu Makkar, Gunjan Kumar.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeals arise from the final judgment and order dated 
20th December 2021 passed by the Gauhati High Court in MFA 
Nos.80 of 2016, 57 of 2016, 29 of 2017 and 28 of 2017 respectively, 
348
Supreme Court Reports
whereby the order dated 19th January 2016 of the Railway Claims 
Tribunal, Guwahati Bench in OA Nos.229/12, 184/12, 228/12 and 
185/2012 respectively came to be affirmed. 
Brief facts
3.	
The brief facts giving rise to this appeal are that the Appellant raised 
demand notices of varied amounts dated 13th October 2011, 7th April 
2012, 29th October 2011, as also 7th April 2012 respectively against 
the respondents, alleging mis-declaration of goods; for consignments 
sent through the Indian Railways. The respondents paid the demands 
raised and thereafter, preferred separate claim petitions under Section 
16 of the Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987, before the Railway 
Claims Tribunal1, Guwahati Bench, seeking a refund of the amount 
paid. It was stated therein that the demand notices being issued 
after the delivery of the goods were illegal in view of Sections 73 
and 74 of the Railways Act, 19892. 
4.	
The Tribunal, allowed the claim petitions vide a common order dated 
19th January 2016, and directed for refund of the amount paid in the 
following manner, along with interest @ 6% per annum :
Claimant  
(Respondent herein)
O.A. number
Amount refunded
C.M. Traders
184/12
Rs. 4,47,965/-
Vinayak Logistics
185/12
Rs. 4,97,342/-
Kamakhya Transport 
Pvt. Ltd.
228/12
Rs. 3,07,902/-
229/12
Rs. 15,12,959/-
5.	
The Tribunal placed reliance on the judgment of the Gauhati High 
Court in Union of India v. Megha Technical & Engineers Pvt. 
Limited3, whereby the Court had held that a demand under Section 83 
of the Act has to be raised before delivery of the goods, to conclude 
that the Appellant could not have imposed punitive charges, after 
delivery of goods to the consigner and if such action was required, 
then the principles of natural justice have to be followed.
1	
Hereafter “the Tribunal”
2	
Hereafter “the Act”
3	
W.A. Nos. 71 – 74 of 2013, Gauhati High Court.
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
349
Union of India v. M/s Kamakhya Transport Pvt. Ltd. Etc. Etc.
6.	
Aggrieved thereof, the appellant, preferred an appeal before the High 
Court of Gauhati, stating therein that the Tribunal failed to consider 
that the consignments were booked by declaring the items to be 
one category, however, the loaded items were found to be different 
from the category declared. 
7.	
The High Court, vide its impugned judgment and order, dismissed the 
appeals of the appellant. The Court made the following observations :
(a)	 Both Section 74 of the Act and Rule 1820 of the Railway 
Commercial Manual II, 1991, permit recovery of dues before 
the delivery of goods.
(b)	 The scope of Section 83 of the Act has been dealt by this 
Court in Jagjit Cotton Textile Mills v. Chief Commercial 
Superintendent N.R. and Ors.4, wherein it was held that punitive 
charges are required to be raised by the Railway authorities 
before delivery is caused. 
(c)	
From a perusal of Sections 73 and 78 of the Act, it is revealed 
that penal charges can be claimed prior to the delivery of goods, 
but not thereafter.
8.	
Dissatisfied, the appellant-Railway authorities are now before us. We 
have heard the learned Additional Solicitor General for the appellant 
and the learned counsel for the respondents. 
Case of the Appellant - Railway Authorities
9.	
The significant point raised by the appellant is that the Courts below 
have erroneously treated the dispute at hand, as one dealing with 
overloading of the wagon which is governed by Section 73 of the Act. 
Meanwhile, the case of the appellant is that the consignments were 
found to be different, from what had been declared, and, consequently, 
the appellant imposed a penalty under Section 66 of the Act.
10.	 Furthermore, the High Court’s reliance on Jagjit Cotton Textile 
(supra), is erroneous, since the factual matrix of that case pertained 
to overloading of the wagon and right to lien. Moreover, the High 
Court has failed to take into consideration, the plain language of 
Section 83, which permits detainment of goods after delivery. 
4	
(1998) 5 SCC 126.
350
Supreme Court Reports
Case of the Respondents
11.	 We have perused the written submissions filed by the respondents. 
The significant point raised by the respondents is that since the 
demand notices were raised after the delivery of goods, Section 
66 of the Act would not be applicable, and the Courts below have 
rightly held in favor of the Respondents. 
Issue for consideration
12.	 In the attending facts and circumstances, the question which arises 
for consideration before this Court is whether the Courts below have 
rightly held that the Railway authorities could not have raised the 
demand notice after the delivery of goods. 
Our view
13.	 As per the appellant - the Railway authorities, Section 66 is applicable 
which is found in Chapter IX of the Act, which seeks to regulate the 
carriage of goods. Section 66 reads as follows:
“66. Power to require statement relating to the 
description of goods.— 
(1) The owner or a person having charge of any goods 
which are brought upon a railway for the purposes of 
carriage by railway, and the consignee or the endorsee of 
any consignment shall, on the request of any railway servant 
authorised in this behalf, deliver to such railway servant 
a statement in writing signed by such owner or person 
or by such consignee or endorsee, as the case may be, 
containing such description of the goods as would enable 
the railway servant to determine the rate for such carriage. 
(2) If such owner or person refuses or neglects to give the 
statement as required under sub-section (1) and refuses 
to open the package containing the goods, if so required 
by the railway servant, it shall be open to the railway 
administration to refuse to accept such goods for carriage 
unless such owner or person pays for such carriage the 
highest rate for any class of goods. 
(3) If the consignee or endorsee refuses or neglects to 
give the statement as required under sub-section (1) and 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
351
Union of India v. M/s Kamakhya Transport Pvt. Ltd. Etc. Etc.
refuses to open the package containing the goods, if so 
required by the railway servant, it shall be open to the 
railway administration to charge in respect of the carriage 
of the goods the highest rate for any class of goods. 
(4) If the statement delivered under sub-section (1) is 
materially false with respect to the description of any goods 
to which it purports to relate, the railway administration 
may charge in respect of the carriage of such goods such 
rate, not exceeding double the highest rate for any class 
of goods as may be specified by the Central Government. 
(5) If any difference arises between a railway servant and 
such owner or person, the consignee or the endorsee, as 
the case may be, in respect of the description of the goods 
for which a statement has been delivered under sub-section 
(1), the railway servant may detain and examine the goods. 
(6) Where any goods have been detained under sub-
section (5) for examination and upon such examination it 
is found that the description of the goods is different from 
that given in the statement delivered under sub-section (1), 
the cost of such detention and examination shall be borne 
by such owner or person, the consignee or the endorsee, 
as the case may be, and the railway administration shall 
not be liable for any loss, damage or deterioration which 
may be caused by such detention or examination.” 
(Emphasis supplied)
14.	 It is borne from the above that a consignee/owner of goods/person 
having charge of goods who has brought goods for the purpose 
of carriage has to give the Railway authorities a written statement 
regarding the description of the goods, to enable them to charge the 
appropriate rate of carriage. Under sub-section (4), if the statement 
is found to be materially false, the Railway authority is empowered 
to charge the goods at the required rate. No reference is made to 
the stage at which such a charge can be made, i.e., either before 
or after delivery. Consequently, it can be seen that the legislative 
intent had to be, to permit levy of charge under this Section, at either 
stage and not at a specific one. 
352
Supreme Court Reports
15.	 Meanwhile, the High Court has considered Sections 73 and 78 of the 
Act, relating to the overloading of the wagon. They read as follows :
“73. Punitive charge for overloading a wagon.—Where a 
person loads goods in a wagon beyond its permissible 
carrying capacity as exhibited under sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3), or notified under sub-section (4), of section 72, 
a railway administration may, in addition to the freight and 
other charges, recover from the consignor, the consignee 
or the endorsee, as the case may be, charges by way of 
penalty at such rates, as may be prescribed, before the 
delivery of the goods: 
Provided that it shall be lawful for the railway administration 
to unload the goods loaded beyond the capacity of the 
wagon, if detected at the forwarding station or at any place 
before the destination station and to recover the cost of 
such unloading and any charge for the detention of any 
wagon on this account.
.....
78. Power to measure, weigh, etc.—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the railway receipt, the railway 
administration may, before the delivery of the consignment, 
have the right to— (i) re-measure, re-weigh or re-classify 
any consignment; (ii) re-calculate the freight and other 
charges; and (iii) correct any other error or collect any 
amount that may have been omitted to be charged.” 
(Emphasis supplied)
16.	 We have perused the demand notices annexed as Annexure P-1 
dated 13th October, 2011, Annexure P-2 dated 29th October, 2011, 
Annexure P-3 dated 7th April, 2012 and Annexure P-4 dated 7th April, 
2012. It is evident from the contents thereof that the demand was 
raised for misdeclaration by the respondents. No reference has been 
made to the overloading of wagon, to which Section 73 applies. 
More so, even the claim petitions do not propose that the demand 
notices have been for the overloading of wagon. T herefore, in our 
view, Section 66 applies to the present lis. 
17.	 Furthermore, we are not inclined to accept the submission of the 
respondents that the demand notices annexed to the petition are not 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
353
Union of India v. M/s Kamakhya Transport Pvt. Ltd. Etc. Etc.
genuine in nature. No evidence has been led to that effect and, more 
over, the claim petitions are silent on such averments. Therefore, in 
the absence of evidence to the contrary, we are inclined to find the 
demand notices to be genuine. 
18.	 Before parting with the appeals at hand, we notice that the High 
Court has held that penal charges can only be applied prior to the 
delivery of goods on the basis of the exposition in Jagjit Cotton 
Textile (supra). The respondents have also placed reliance on the 
same judgment to submit that penal charges can be imposed only 
prior to the delivery of goods. We find such an approach to be 
erroneous and not in furtherance of the exposition in Jagjit Cotton 
Textile (supra). The relevant paragraph, as relied upon by the 
respondents, is as follows :
“22. Again Section 54(1) states that the Railway 
Administration may impose conditions not inconsistent 
with the Act or with any general rules made thereunder, 
“with respect to the receiving, forwarding or delivery of 
any animal or goods”. In our view one such “condition” 
could be by directing that penal charges could be collected 
before delivering the goods.”
19.	 From a perusal of the above, it is clear that when this Court observed 
“one such ‘condition’ could be by directing that penal charges could be 
collected before delivering the goods”, it was a suggestion, to explain 
the conditions that could be imposed by the Railway Administration 
under Section 54(1). Moreover, the above exposition in Jagjit Cotton 
Textile (supra), was made in the context of Section 54 only, while 
the facts of this case pertain to Section 66 of the Act.
20.	 In view of the above, the impugned order dated 20th December, 2021 
passed by the Gauhati High Court in MFA Nos.80 of 2016, 57 of 
2016, 29 of 2017 and 28 of 2017, is hereby set aside. In the attending 
facts and circumstances of this case, the civil appeals are allowed. 
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey