[2025] 1 S.C.R. 657 : 2025 INSC 47
Goverdhan & Anr. 
v. 
State of Chhattisgarh 
(Criminal Appeal No. 116 of 2011)
09 January 2025
[B.R. Gavai, K.V. Viswanathan and 
Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh,* JJ.] 
Issue for Consideration
The two accused-appellants and their father-the third accused, were 
convicted by the trial court u/s.302 r/w s.34 IPC for assaulting a 
person with deadly weapons causing his death. High Court upheld 
the conviction of the appellants while setting aside the conviction of 
their father. The complainant (PW-6) who filed the FIR was initially 
projected as the eye witness but later turned hostile during the trial 
and it was only PW-10 (mother of the deceased) who claimed to 
be the eye witness. The conviction of appellants was challenged 
in the instant appeal as being illegal causing grave miscarriage 
of justice to them.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – s.304, Part I – Armed assault leading to 
death – Testimony of deceased’s mother (a rustic illiterate 
woman) trustworthy and reliable – Corroboration from other 
evidence – Prosecution case proved beyond reasonable 
doubt  – However, motive not clearly established, though 
appellants fully knew that the bodily injuries caused by them 
were likely to cause death – Conviction accordingly converted 
from s.302 (by Courts below) to Part I of s.304:
Held: 1. Merely because statement of PW-10, mother of the 
deceased, under Section 161 CrPC was recorded belatedly i.e. after 
five days which have been duly considered by the High Court and 
there are some inconsistencies and embellishments in her testimony 
before the trial court, one is not persuaded to take the view that 
PW-10 cannot be an eye-witness and her testimony not credible – 
No material contradiction between the statement made by her 
before the court and the previous statement recorded under Section 
161 CrPC could be shown by the defence under Section 162(1) 
* Author
658
Supreme Court Reports
and Explanation thereto as to render her testimony doubtful – A 
careful perusal of the testimony of PW-10 shows that her narration 
of the incident was natural, and trustworthy – PW-10, the mother 
of the deceased, though was related to the victim, cannot by any 
stretch of imagination be said to be an interested witness – As also 
observed by the High Court, there is no reason why the mother 
of the victim should falsely implicate the appellants without any 
rhyme or reason more so when apparently there was no previous 
animosity of PW-10 with any of the appellants – The trial court 
after recording the testimony of the PW-10 and on consideration of 
the same found her evidence trustworthy and credible – There is 
no reason to question the assessment about the credibility of the 
witness by the Trial Court which had the advantage of seeing and 
hearing above the witness and all other witnesses – Even if there 
are certain embellishments and improvements and contradictions 
which are of minor nature, the evidence of PW-10 on the whole 
does appear to be consistent and there is no cogent reason to 
disbelieve her claim that she had witnessed the incident – Thus, 
there appears to be no patent illegality in the view taken by the 
trial court and the High Court. [Paras 79, 80, 81, 83, 84]
2.1. The evidence which has emerged is that the father PW-5 
came to the scene after the assailants appellants had fled – As 
far as the mother PW-10 is concerned, on seeing the assault she 
ran inside to wake up her husband and when they came out, the 
assailants had fled – It cannot be considered to be highly unnatural 
for a woman not rushing to intervene and instead seek the help 
of a male member (her husband) when there were two persons 
with deadly weapons assaulting her. [Para 86]
2.2. The evidence of PW-10, the sole eye witness, a hapless 
rustic illiterate woman visited with the vicissitude and tragedy of 
her son being fatally assaulted by co-villagers before her own 
eyes, has withstood intensive cross examination and judicial 
scrutiny – She has answered the questions put to her during her 
cross examination with spontaneity without any jitteriness and her 
response was natural and not elusive and prevaricating, which all 
are signs of truthfulness of the witness – Therefore, her testimony 
is trustworthy and reliable – Her evidence finds corroboration from 
the admissible part of the evidence of the complainant (PW-6), and 
her husband (PW-5) even though they had turned hostile, and the 
medical evidence, evidence of the Investigating Officer and other 
official witnesses. [Para 87]
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
659
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
3. The Prosecution has been able to establish beyond reasonable 
doubt that the appellants were responsible for the death of the 
deceased, for which they were convicted by the trial court under 
Section 302 IPC – There is no glaring illegality or perversity in 
the findings arrived at the trial court and the High Court causing 
any grave miscarriage of justice to the appellants. [Paras 88, 89]
4. The motive for committing the crime has not been clearly 
established and proved – However, it is established beyond 
reasonable doubt that the appellants had caused the death 
of the deceased fully knowing that the bodily injuries caused 
by the appellants were likely to cause death as the appellants 
were armed with deadly weapons, therefore, the appellants are 
convicted under Part I of Section 304 IPC – Appellants have 
already undergone 10 years 3 months of incarceration – Under 
the facts and circumstances, interest of justice will be served if 
the appellants are sentenced to the period already undergone by 
them. [Paras 90, 91, 93 and 94]
Evidence – Standard of proof in a criminal case is not 
proof beyond all doubts but only beyond reasonable 
doubt – Contradistinction to requirement of proof based on 
preponderance of probabilities as in case of civil proceedings. 
[Para 20]
Evidence – FIR – Appreciation of:
Held: Though the FIR is not a piece of substantive evidence, 
especially, when the Complainant, i.e., PW-6 did not fully support 
the contents of the FIR, yet, it cannot be totally ignored and is to 
be treated as a relevant circumstance if the same is proved by 
other prosecution witness, in this case by PW-14, the SHO who 
recorded the report in the form of FIR as stated to him by the 
complainant. [Para 30]
Evidence – Armed assault leading to death – Noting made by 
the doctor on the medical record – Appreciation of:
Held: Though the medical report was not made immediately after 
the incident, it was made without much time gap and it was made 
almost contemporaneously with the incident – Further, the medical 
record was in conformity with the FIR filed by the complainant, PW-6, 
thus corroborating the contents of the FIR in which the appellants 
were named as the assailants – Since the FIR was filed soon after 
the incident occurred and the names of the appellants were again 
660
Supreme Court Reports
mentioned in the medical record as the assailants within a very 
short span of time, there was hardly any scope for fabrication of 
evidence and falsely implicating the appellants in the case, as they 
were already named in the FIR. [Para 65]
Evidence – Armed assault leading to death – Hostile witness – 
Seizure witnesses turning hostile – Effect:
Held: The seizure witnesses have not denied their signatures on 
the seizure memo and admitted putting their signatures – Though 
both the witnesses have denied having any knowledge of the 
actual recovery of the weapons at the instance of the appellants, 
their denials do not appear convincing – However, since the IO of 
the case, PW-15 had proved the said seizure memos, there is no 
reason to hold that there was no seizure that was affected merely 
because the two seizure witnesses had turned hostile. [Paras 68, 71]
Evidence – In a trial, the assessment of evidence cannot be 
made in a technical manner – Realities of life must be kept 
in mind for arriving at the truth. [Para 66]
Evidence – Non recovery of the weapon of crime – Is not fatal 
to the prosecution case and is not sine qua non for conviction, 
if there are direct reliable witnesses. [Para 70]
Evidence – Testimony of police personnel involved in recovery 
of articles – Appreciation of. [Para 71]
Evidence – Armed assault leading to death – Untruthful and 
evasive testimony of the neighbours:
Held: The testimonies of some neighbours were highly unnatural and 
untruthful and they appear to be reluctant to come up with the truth 
in order to protect the appellants – Because of the unnaturalness 
of the testimonies of these neighbours before the court, which 
defy human behaviour, the reasonable inference one can draw is 
that these witnesses have been won over – The fact that all these 
witnesses had close association with the acquitted father of the two 
appellants on account of consumption of ganja also clearly indicates 
the influence the latter may have on these witnesses. [Paras 73, 75]
Evidence – Hostile witness – Merely because the witnesses 
turn hostile does not necessarily mean that their evidence 
has to be thrown out entirely. [Para 76]
Evidence – Armed assault leading to death – Role of acquitted 
accused not coming out clearly – Appellants-convicts cannot 
be placed at par with the case of acquitted accused:
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
661
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
Held: Just because the father of the Appellants was acquitted will 
not warrant their acquittal as there is sufficient and cogent material 
evidence against them to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt 
whereas the case against the acquitted father of the appellants is 
doubtful. [Para 85]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.280 – Demeanour of 
witness while under examination – Assessment by trial court – 
Ought not be ignored by the Appellate Court. [Para 82]
Words and Phrases – “reasonable doubt” – Meaning of 
reasonable doubt is not an imaginary, trivial or a merely 
possible doubt, but a fair doubt based upon reason and 
common sense. [Paras 21, 22]
Case Law Cited
Ramakant Rai v. Madan Rai [2003] Supp. 4 SCR 17 : (2003) 12 
SCC 395; State of Haryana v. Bhagirath [1999] 3 SCR 529 : (1999) 
5 SCC 96; Shivaji Sahebrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [1974] 
1 SCR 489 : (1973) 2 SCC 793; Bable v. State of Chhattisgarh 
[2012] 6 SCR 517 : (2012) 11 SCC 181; Leela Ram (Dead) 
through Duli Chand v. State of Haryana [1999] Supp. 3 SCR 
435 : (1999) 9 SCC 525; Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State 
of Gujarat [1983] 3 SCR 280 : (1983) 3 SCC 217; Appabhai v. 
State of Gujarat (1988) Supp. SCC 241; Prabhu Dayal v. State 
of Rajasthan (2018) 8 SCC 127; State of H.P. v. Lekh Raj [1999] 
Supp. 4 SCR 286 : (2000) 1 SCC 247; Rakesh v. State of U.P. 
[2021] 6 SCR 874 : (2021) 7 SCC 188; Karamjit Singh v. State 
(Delhi Admn.) [2003] 3 SCR 25 : (2003) 5 SCC 291; Gangadhar 
Behera v. State of Orissa [2002] Supp. 3 SCR 183 : (2002) 8 SCC 
381; Raja v. State of Karnataka [2016] 9 SCR 615 : (2016) 10 
SCC 506; Mohd. Rojali Ali v. The State of Assam (2019) 9 SCC 
567; Jagdish Singh v. Madhuri Devi [2008] 6 SCR 1176 : (2008) 
10 SCC 497; Mekala Sivaiah v. State of Andhra Pradesh [2022] 
6 SCR 989 : (2022) 8 SCC 253 – relied on.
State of Orissa v. Brahmananda Nanda (1976) 4 SCC 288; State 
of Punjab v. Sucha Singh (2003) 3 SCC 153 – held inapplicable.
State of U.P. v. Satish [2005] 1 SCR 1132 : (2005) 3 SCC 114 – 
referred to.
Miller v. Miller of Pensions (1947) 2 All ER 372, 373 – referred to.
662
Supreme Court Reports
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
s.304, Part I of IPC; Section 161 CrPC; Evidence; Assault with 
deadly weapons; Eye witness; Miscarriage of justice; Rustic illiterate 
woman; Motive; Bodily injuries likely to cause death; Conviction 
converted; Standard of proof in a criminal case; Proof based on 
preponderance of probabilities; FIR; Medical record; Hostile witness; 
Seizure witness; Assessment of evidence; Non-recovery of weapon 
of crime; Testimony of neighbour; Acquitted accused; Demeanour 
of witness while under examination; “Reasonable doubt”.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
116 of 2011
From the Judgment and Order dated 30.11.2009 of the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in CRLA No. 290 of 2002
Appearances for Parties
Dr. Rajesh Pandey, Sr. Adv., Chandrika Prasad Mishra, Mahesh 
Pandey, Rahil Kochar, Ms. Nishi Prabha Singh, Ms. Prashasti 
Singh, Mrs. Swati Surbhi, U.N. Mishra, Ms. Aswathi M.K., Advs. 
for the Appellants.
Ravi Sharma, D.A.G., Mrs. Prerna Dhall, Piyush Yadav, Alok Sahay, 
Advs. for the Respondent.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, J.
1.	
The present appeal has been preferred against judgement and order 
dated 30.11.2009 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in the Criminal Appeal No. 290/2002 
whereby the High Court upheld the conviction and sentence 
imposed upon the present two appellants under Section 302 read 
with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred as 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
663
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
‘IPC’) while setting aside the conviction of the third accused and 
thus, acquitting him.
2.	
As the two appellants are seeking reversal of the concurrent findings 
by two courts, the Sessions Court and the High Court, this Court 
has to tread very cautiously as observed by this Court on numerous 
occasions including in Mekala Sivaiah v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 
(2022) 8 SCC 253 wherein it has been held that unless the findings 
are perverse and rendered in ignorance of material evidence, this 
Court should be slow in interfering with concurring findings. Thus it 
was, observed in Mekala Sivaiah (supra) as follows:
“15. It is well settled by judicial pronouncement that Article 
136 is worded in wide terms and powers conferred under 
the said Article are not hedged by any technical hurdles. 
This overriding and exceptional power is, however, to be 
exercised sparingly and only in furtherance of cause of 
justice. Thus, when the judgment under appeal has resulted 
in grave miscarriage of justice by some misapprehension 
or misreading of evidence or by ignoring material evidence 
then this Court is not only empowered but is well expected 
to interfere to promote the cause of justice.
16. It is not the practice of this Court to re-appreciate 
the evidence for the purpose of examining whether the 
findings of fact concurrently arrived at by the trial court 
and the High Court are correct or not. It is only in rare and 
exceptional cases where there is some manifest illegality 
or grave and serious miscarriage of justice on account of 
misreading or ignoring material evidence, that this Court 
would interfere with such finding of fact.”
In the above case, this Court, while dealing with a criminal appeal 
against an order of the High Court of Judicature of Andhra Pradesh 
upheld the conviction of the accused by the Sessions Court, and 
declined to interfere with the conviction.
3.	
Keeping the aforesaid principle in mind, this Court would proceed 
to decide the appeal at hand to examine whether there is some 
manifest error or illegality and if any grave and serious miscarriage 
of justice on account of misreading or ignoring material evidence has 
occurred in the present case. This invariably would require a proper 
664
Supreme Court Reports
examination of the facts and context of the case, for which we must 
revisit the background facts of the case and evidence adduced.
4.	
It may be noted that since the State has not preferred any appeal 
against the acquittal of the third accused, Chintaram, the father 
of the two appellants, we may not burden ourselves in detail with 
the evidence relating to the initial conviction and the subsequent 
acquittal of the third accused Chintaram except those as may have 
ramifications for the present two appellants.
5.	
The case of the prosecution in brief is that on 23.09.2001, at about 
7.00 am, the complainant, Santosh Kumar Mandle (PW-6), who 
was employed by the parents of the deceased, namely Shatrughan 
Sharma (PW5) and Lata Bai (PW-10), while washing utensils at 
the house of the deceased Suraj, heard a cry for help from Suraj. 
Upon hearing, he came out of the house and saw the three accused 
Goverdhan, Rajendra and Chintaram assaulting Suraj with an axe 
(tangiya) and iron pipe. Chintaram was also hitting the deceased with 
fists and kicks and urging his two sons, Goverdhan and Rajendra, 
the present appellants to kill Suraj. Santosh (PW-6) immediately 
informed Shatrughan Sharma (PW-5) and Smt. Lata Bai (PW-10) 
about the incident. Santosh also mentioned about the altercation 
between Chintaram and Suraj the previous night about ganja.
6.	
Soon, thereafter, an FIR was lodged by Santosh which was registered 
u/s 307 IPC vide Ex. P/12 at around 7.30 am on the same day i.e. 
23.09.2001.
7.	
The injured Suraj was immediately rushed to the local hospital and 
was examined by the doctor, Dr. G.R. Agarwal (PW-1) who found 
as many as nine injuries on the deceased, which were as follows :
i)	
One contusion of 6 cm x 5 cm with active bleeding, and fracture 
of under beneath bone over right temporal region
ii)	
One incised wound of ½ cm x ½ cm x screen deep just above 
right ear.
iii)	
One incised wound over occipital region of 5 cm x 1 cm x skin 
deep.
iv)	
One incised wound over frontal region of 4 cm x 1 cm x skin 
deep.
v)	
One incised wound of 4 cm x 1 cm x skin deep 10 cm from 
injury No.3.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
665
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
vi)	
One lacerated wound over right hand of 7 cm x 3 cm x skin deep.
vii)	 One incised wound over left hand of 2 cm x ½ cm x skin deep.
viii)	 One lacerated wound over right hand of 3 cm x 2 cm x skin deep.
ix)	
One lacerated wound over right elbow of 3 cm x 2 cm x skin 
Deep. Active bleeding was present over the injury.
In view of the seriousness of the injuries, the victim was referred to 
the Medical College Hospital, Raipur and thereafter, shifted to MMI 
Hospital where he succumbed to his injuries on 25.09.2001 at about 
9.22 pm. The cause of death was mentioned as coma as a result of 
injuries received and death was opined to be homicidal in nature. 
Subsequently, charge under Section 302 IPC was added to the FIR. 
Necessary investigation was carried out by the Investigating Officer. 
8.	
Based on the disclosure statement made by Goverdhan, Appellant 
No. 1 on the same day on 23.9.2001, two blood-stained axes were 
recovered at his instance from his father’s room vide Ex.P/6. Appellant 
No. 2 Rajendra also made a disclosure statement on 23.9.2001 at 
about 3.45 p.m. relating to iron pipe vide Ex.P/4, and the same was 
recovered from his father’s room vide Ex.P/5. Blood-stained soil and 
plain soil were recovered from the place of incident vide Ex.P/7. 
Blood-stained clothes were seized from Shatrughan Sharma (PW-5) 
vide Ex.P/10. Spot map was prepared by the Patwari (PW-8) vide 
Ex.P/16 as witnessed by Santosh (PW-6), Kanhaiya (PW-11) and 
Shailu (PW-2). Goverdhan and Rajendra were arrested on 23.9.2001 
vide Exs. P/23 and P/24. Seized articles were examined by Dr. 
G.R. Agrawal (PW-1) vide Ex.P/2. The seized articles were sent for 
medical analysis. The presence of blood over two axes recovered at 
the instance of Goverdhan and iron pipe recovered at the instance of 
Rajendra, was confirmed vide Ex.P/30. The Investigating Officer (IO) 
recorded the statements of the witnesses under Section 161 CrPC.
9.	
To prove the guilt of the accused, the Prosecution examined as 
many as 15 witnesses. Statements of the accused were also 
recorded under Section 313 of the Code, where they denied the 
circumstances appearing against them and claimed innocence by 
pleading false implication in the crime in question. The accused had 
also produced two defence witnesses, Ramlal Yadav (DW-1) and 
Lakhan Lal Sahu (DW-2) to prove that the police pressurised the 
mother of the deceased Suraj, Lata Bai (PW-10) to give evidence 
against the accused persons.
666
Supreme Court Reports
10.	 The Court of the Second Additional Sessions Judge, Raipur, on 
appreciation of the evidence before it and after hearing the parties, 
convicted all the three accused persons under Section 302 read 
with Section 34 of the IPC, and sentenced them to undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for life along with a fine of ₹10,000, and in default 
of payment of such fine, each accused was directed to undergo 
additional rigorous imprisonment for 3 years in terms of the judgment 
dated 06.03.2002.
11.	 In the statutory appeal preferred by the three accused persons, the 
High Court affirmed the conviction of the present two appellants while 
acquitting the third accused, Chintaram, by the impugned judgment 
dated 30.11.2009.
12.	 Before the High Court, the appellants had taken various pleas, 
including that the convictions were not based on cogent evidence, the 
sole eye witness account of Lata Bai (PW-10) was uncorroborated 
and wholly unreliable as her initial statement under Section 161 
CrPC, was recorded belatedly after 5 days of the incident and that 
all the remaining non-official witnesses had turned hostile, including 
the Complainant (PW-10) and the father of the deceased (PW-5) 
who were cited to be eye-witnesses by the Prosecution, and seizure 
witnesses. 
13.	 On the other hand, it was contended on behalf of the Prosecution 
before the High Court that there was no reason to disbelieve the 
testimony of the mother of the deceased, Lata Bai (PW-10) merely 
because her statement was recorded belatedly as her name finds 
place in the FIR filed by Santosh (PW-6) which was filed within half 
an hour of the incident and the filing of the FIR was proved by the 
evidence of the hostile witness Santosh (PW-6), and there were 
other corroborating evidence. The Prosecution also relied on the 
decision of this Court in State of U.P. v. Satish, (2005) 3 SCC 114 
in submitting that mere delay in examination of witnesses would not 
be fatal if plausible and acceptable explanations are offered. 
14.	 The High Court, after a detailed analysis of the evidence on record, 
repelled the contentions of the appellants and convicted them while 
acquitting Accused No. 3, their father, Chintaram, giving him benefit 
of doubt about his participation in the crime.
15.	 Thus, the two appellants before us are impugning the judgment 
passed by the High Court upholding their conviction.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
667
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
16.	 The pleas of the appellants before us summarized as below:
(i)	
Since the third accused namely Chintaram, who is the father 
of the two appellants had been acquitted by the High Court on 
the same set of evidence on which the two appellants had been 
convicted, the two appellants should have also been acquitted 
on the ground of parity since there is no material difference in 
the nature and quality of evidence qua all the three accused.
(ii)	
That otherwise also, conviction could not have been sustained 
on the basis of the uncorroborated testimony of a sole eye 
witness, who is also an interested witness namely, Lata Bai 
(PW10), the mother of the deceased.
(iii)	 The Sessions Court had convicted the appellants primarily on 
the testimony of the Lata Bai (PW-10), the alleged eyewitness, 
though she could not have been an eye witness, as Santosh 
(PW-6), in his FIR mentioned that he informed about the 
incident to the mother and father of Suraj, which shows that 
Lata Bai (PW-10) only after being informed of the incident after 
the incident had occurred, came to know of the incident and 
hence, could not have seen the incident.
(iv)	 Further, the statement of Lata Bai (PW-10) was recorded after 
5 days of the incident and the Prosecution has not explained 
the delay in recording her statement under Section 161 of the 
Code and in absence of a proper explanation, her statement is 
not reliable in connection with which the defence relied upon on 
the decision of this Court in State of Orissa v. Brahmananda 
Nanda, (1976) 4 SCC 288 wherein this Court held that failure to 
mention the names of the accused for one and half days is fatal.
(v)	
It was also contended that according to the Prosecution, the 
mother (PW-10) and father (PW-5) of the deceased were 
present but they made no attempt to intervene or try to rescue 
the victim which shows that, they did not witness the incident 
and hence the statement of Lata Bai is highly doubtful. In this 
regard, the defence had cited the decision of this Court in 
State of Punjab v. Sucha Singh, (2003) 3 SCC 153 wherein, 
it was observed by this Court that any father, worth the name, 
who was claiming to be present at the place of incident would 
not remain a mute spectator when his son is being inflicted as 
many as twenty-four injuries under his very nose.
668
Supreme Court Reports
(vi)	 It was also contended that there have been improvements, 
and embellishments in the testimony of Lata Bai (PW-10), thus 
rendering her evidence unreliable and not credible.
(vii)	 The appellants also have contended that almost all the non-
official prosecution witnesses, except the mother, had turned 
hostile and had not supported the prosecution case including 
the informant Santosh (PW-6) and seizure witnesses, PW-2 
and PW-12.
17.	 On the other hand, before us also, it has been contended on behalf 
of the Prosecution that as far as the two appellants are concerned, 
it can be said that the conclusion drawn by the Trial Court as well 
as the High Court is based on admissible and relevant evidence 
and as such their conviction cannot be said to be suffering from 
any illegality, and since there is no perversity in the finding arrived 
at by the two courts below, this Court ought not interfere with the 
judgment of the High Court.
ANALYSIS BY THIS COURT
18.	 In case of a crime committed, upon completion of investigation by 
the investigation agency, the accused are brought before the court 
to face trial. Under our criminal jurisprudence, the court ordinarily is 
not privy to the evidence collected during the investigation by the 
investigation agency. After completion of the investigation, what is 
brought before the trial court is an array of evidence, both documentary 
and oral, collected by the investigating agency against the accused 
which are required to be marshalled and analyzed by the court to 
arrive at appropriate conclusions. The prosecution seeks to recreate 
the incident of crime before the court in sequence, based on the 
evidence so collected, linking the accused with the commission of 
crime. Such recreation of crime by the prosecution before the court is 
akin to putting the evidence together as in a jigsaw puzzle whereby 
all the relevant pieces of evidence are put together to complete 
the picture of the crime. The prime responsibility of the court is to 
see whether this jigsaw puzzle has been properly placed by the 
prosecution from which a clear picture emerges as to the happening 
of the incident with the assigned role of the accused as part of the 
aforesaid jigsaw puzzle. Only, thereafter, the role of the accused in 
perpetrating the offence can be properly ascribed and proved and 
accordingly, criminal liability fastened on the accused.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
669
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
19.	 As per Section 3 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, a fact can be 
said to have been proved when, after considering the matters before 
it, the court either believes it to exist or considers its existence so 
probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the 
particular case, to act up on the supposition that it exists. The court 
undertakes this exercise of examining whether the facts alleged 
including the particular criminal acts attributed to the accused are 
proved or not.
20.	 It is also to be noted that the law does not contemplate stitching the 
pieces of evidence in a watertight manner, for the standard of proof 
in a criminal case is not proof beyond all doubts but only beyond 
reasonable doubt. In other words, if a clear picture emerges on 
piecing together all evidence which indicates beyond reasonable 
doubt of the role played by the accused in the perpetration of the 
crime, the court holds the accused criminally liable and punishes 
them under the provisions of the penal code, in contradistinction to 
the requirement of proof based on the preponderance of probabilities 
as in case of civil proceedings.
21.	 It will be relevant to discuss, at this juncture, what is meant by 
“reasonable doubt”. It means that such doubt must be free from 
suppositional speculation. It must not be the result of minute 
emotional detailing, and the doubt must be actual and substantial 
and not merely vague apprehension. A reasonable doubt is not an 
imaginary, trivial or a merely possible doubt, but a fair doubt based 
upon reason and common sense as observed in Ramakant Rai v. 
Madan Rai, (2003) 12 SCC 395 wherein it was observed as under : 
“24. Doubts would be called reasonable if they are free 
from a zest for abstract speculation. Law cannot afford 
any favourite other than the truth. To constitute reasonable 
doubt, it must be free from an overly emotional response. 
Doubts must be actual and substantial doubts as to the guilt 
of the accused persons arising from the evidence, or from 
the lack of it, as opposed to mere vague apprehensions. 
A reasonable doubt is not an imaginary, trivial or a merely 
possible doubt; but a fair doubt based upon reason and 
common sense. It must grow out of the evidence in the 
case.”
670
Supreme Court Reports
22.	 While applying this principle of proof beyond reasonable doubt the 
Court has to undertake a candid consideration of all the evidence 
in a fair and reasonable manner as observed by this Court in State 
of Haryana v. Bhagirath (1999) 5 SCC 96 as follows:
“8. It is nearly impossible in any criminal trial to prove all 
the elements with a scientific precision. A criminal court 
could be convinced of the guilt only beyond the range of a 
reasonable doubt. Of course, the expression ‘reasonable 
doubt’ is incapable of definition. Modern thinking is in favour 
of the view that proof beyond a reasonable doubt is the 
same as proof which affords moral certainty to the Judge.
9. Francis Wharton, a celebrated writer on criminal law in 
the United States has quoted from judicial pronouncements 
in his book Wharton’s Criminal Evidence (at p. 31, Vol. 1 
of the 12th Edn.) as follows:
‘It is difficult to define the phrase “reasonable doubt”. 
However, in all criminal cases a careful explanation of the 
term ought to be given. A definition often quoted or followed 
is that given by Chief Justice Shaw in the Webster case 
[Commonwealth v. Webster, 5 Cush 295 : 59 Mass 295 
(1850)] . He says: “It is not mere possible doubt, because 
everything relating to human affairs and depending upon 
moral evidence is open to some possible or imaginary 
doubt. It is that state of the case which, after the entire 
comparison and consideration of all the evidence, leaves 
the minds of the jurors in that consideration that they cannot 
say they feel an abiding conviction to a moral certainty of 
the truth of the charge.” ’
10. In the treatise The Law of Criminal Evidence authored 
by H.C. Underhill it is stated (at p. 34, Vol. 1 of the 5th 
Edn.) thus:
‘The doubt to be reasonable must be such a one as 
an honest, sensible and fair-minded man might, with 
reason, entertain consistent with a conscientious desire to 
ascertain the truth. An honestly entertained doubt of guilt 
is a reasonable doubt. A vague conjecture or an inference 
of the possibility of the innocence of the accused is not 
a reasonable doubt. A reasonable doubt is one which 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
671
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
arises from a consideration of all the evidence in a fair and 
reasonable way. There must be a candid consideration of 
all the evidence and if, after this candid consideration is 
had by the jurors, there remains in the minds a conviction 
of the guilt of the accused, then there is no room for a 
reasonable doubt.’
23.	 The concept of reasonable doubt has to be also understood in the 
Indian context, keeping in mind the social reality and this principle 
cannot be stretched beyond a reasonable limit to avoid generating a 
cynical view of law as observed by this Court in Shivaji Sahebrao 
Bobade v. State of Maharashtra, (1973) 2 SCC 793 as follows: 
“6. Even at this stage we may remind ourselves of a 
necessary social perspective in criminal cases which 
suffers from insufficient forensic appreciation. The dangers 
of exaggerated devotion to the rule of benefit of doubt at the 
expense of social defence and to the soothing sentiment 
that all acquittals are always good regardless of justice to 
the victim and the community, demand especial emphasis in 
the contemporary context of escalating crime and escape. 
The judicial instrument has a public accountability. The 
cherished principles or golden thread of proof beyond 
reasonable doubt which runs through the web of our 
law should not be stretched morbidly to embrace every 
hunch, hesitancy and degree of doubt. The excessive 
solicitude reflected in the attitude that a thousand guilty 
men may go but one innocent martyr shall not suffer is 
a false dilemma. Only reasonable doubts belong to the 
accused. Otherwise any practical system of justice will 
then break down and lose credibility with the community. 
The evil of acquitting a guilty person light heartedly as 
a learned Author [ Glanville Williams in ‘Proof of Guilt’.] 
has sapiently observed, goes much beyond the simple 
fact that just one guilty person has gone unpunished. If 
unmerited acquittals become general, they tend to lead 
to a cynical disregard of the law, and this in turn leads to 
a public demand for harsher legal presumptions against 
indicted “persons” and more severe punishment of those 
who are found guilty. Thus, too frequent acquittals of 
the guilty may lead to a ferocious penal law, eventually 
672
Supreme Court Reports
eroding the judicial protection of the guiltless. For all 
these reasons it is true to say, with Viscount Simon, that 
“a miscarriage of justice may arise from the acquittal of 
the guilty no less than from the conviction of the innocent 
.…” In short, our jurisprudential enthusiasm for presumed 
innocence must be moderated by the pragmatic need to 
make criminal justice potent and realistic. A balance has 
to be struck between chasing chance possibilities as good 
enough to set the delinquent free and chopping the logic 
of preponderant probability to punish marginal innocents. 
We have adopted these cautions in analysing the evidence 
and appraising the soundness of the contrary conclusions 
reached by the courts below. Certainly, in the last analysis 
reasonable doubts must operate to the advantage of the 
appellant. In India the law has been laid down on these 
lines long ago.”
24.	 Further, what would be the standard degree of “proof” which would be 
required in any particular case was also discussed in the aforesaid 
case of Ramakant Rai (supra) in the following words:
“23. A person has, no doubt, a profound right not to be 
convicted of an offence which is not established by the 
evidential standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt. 
Though this standard is a higher standard, there is, 
however, no absolute standard. What degree of probability 
amounts to “proof” is an exercise particular to each case. 
Referring to (sic) of probability amounts to “proof” is 
an exercise, the interdependence of evidence and the 
confirmation of one piece of evidence by another, as 
learned author says : [see The Mathematics of Proof II : 
Glanville Williams, Criminal Law Review, 1979, by Sweet 
and Maxwell, p. 340 (342)]
“The simple multiplication rule does not apply if 
the separate pieces of evidence are dependent. 
Two events are dependent when they tend 
to occur together, and the evidence of such 
events may also be said to be dependent. In 
a criminal case, different pieces of evidence 
directed to establishing that the defendant did 
the prohibited act with the specified state of 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
673
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
mind are generally dependent. A juror may feel 
doubt whether to credit an alleged confession, 
and doubt whether to infer guilt from the fact 
that the defendant fled from justice. But since 
it is generally guilty rather than innocent people 
who make confessions, and guilty rather than 
innocent people who run away, the two doubts 
are not to be multiplied together. The one piece 
of evidence may confirm the other.”
24.	 ………………..
………………..
25. The concepts of probability, and the degrees of it, 
cannot obviously be expressed in terms of units to be 
mathematically enumerated as to how many of such 
units constitute proof beyond reasonable doubt. There 
is an unmistakable subjective element in the evaluation 
of the degrees of probability and the quantum of proof. 
Forensic probability must, in the last analysis, rest on 
a robust common sense and, ultimately, on the trained 
intuitions of the judge. While the protection given by the 
criminal process to the accused persons is not to be 
eroded, at the same time, uninformed legitimisation of 
trivialities would make a mockery of the administration of 
criminal justice. This position was illuminatingly stated by 
Venkatachaliah, J. (as His Lordship then was) in State 
of U.P. v. Krishna Gopal [(1988) 4 SCC 302 : 1988 SCC 
(Cri) 928 : AIR 1988 SC 2154] .”
25.	 At this point, it may be also relevant to mention an observation 
made by Lord Denning, J. in Miller v. Miller of Pensions (1947) 2 
All ER 372, 373 H:
“That degree is well settled. It need not reach certainty, 
but it must carry a high degree of probability. Proof beyond 
reasonable doubt does not mean proof beyond the shadow 
of a doubt. The law would fail to protect the community if it 
admitted fanciful possibilities to deflect the court of justice….”
26.	 Thus, the requirement of law in criminal trials is not to prove the case 
beyond all doubt but beyond reasonable doubt and such doubt cannot 
674
Supreme Court Reports
be imaginary, fanciful, trivial or merely a possible doubt but a fair 
doubt based on reason and common sense. Hence, in the present 
case, if the allegations against the appellants are held proved beyond 
reasonable doubt, certainly conviction cannot be said to be illegal. 
27.	 In the present case, as far as the death of the deceased is concerned, 
there is no dispute about the same. The appellants have not contested 
the case of the Prosecution that the deceased died on account of 
grievous injuries caused by sharp weapons. Their plea is that of 
ignorance of the death and also alibi, that they were in another 
village. As such, it may be unnecessary for us to go into detail as 
regards the nature of injuries received by the deceased which has 
been already described in the earlier part of the judgment and the 
cause of the injury, except for corroboration of the evidence of the 
sole eye witness.
28.	 Since the appellants have contended that the non-official prosecution 
witnesses, except for one, have not supported the prosecution case, 
it would be necessary for us to revisit the evidence and testimonies 
of the prosecution witnesses and to see whether appreciation of 
the same by the Trial Court and the High Court suffers from any 
material illegality.
29.	 For this, it may be appropriate to commence our analysis of the 
evidence of the complaint filed by Santosh (PW-6) which triggered 
the criminal process and his testimony in the court in which he 
resiled from his previous incriminating statement made against the 
appellants under Section 161 CrPC as well as the FIR.
30.	 Though the FIR is not a piece of substantive evidence, especially, 
when the Complainant, i.e., PW-6 did not fully support the contents 
of the FIR, yet, it cannot be totally ignored and is to be treated as 
a relevant circumstance if the same is proved by other prosecution 
witness, in this case by PW-14, the SHO who recorded the report 
in the form of FIR as stated to him by the complainant.
In this regard, we may profitably refer to the decision of this Court 
in Bable v. State of Chhattisgarh, (2012) 11 SCC 181 wherein it 
was observed as follows: 
“14. Once registration of the FIR is proved by the police 
and the same is accepted on record by the court and the 
prosecution establishes its case beyond reasonable doubt 
by other admissible, cogent and relevant evidence, it will 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
675
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
be impermissible for the Court to ignore the evidentiary 
value of the FIR. The FIR, Ext. P-1, has duly been proved 
by the statement of PW 10, Sub-Inspector, Suresh Bhagat. 
According to him, he had registered the FIR upon the 
statement of PW 1 and it was duly signed by him. The 
FIR was registered and duly formed part of the records 
of the police station which were maintained in the normal 
course of its business and investigation. Thus, in any case, 
it is a settled proposition of law that the FIR by itself is 
not a substantive piece of evidence but it certainly is a 
relevant circumstance of the evidence produced by the 
investigating agency. Merely because PW 1 had turned 
hostile, it cannot be said that the FIR would lose all its 
relevancy and cannot be looked into for any purpose.”
31.	 In the present case, PW-14, Ram Krishna Dubey who was the SHO 
of the Police Station, Newra at the relevant time testified that on 
23.09.2001 he registered the FIR No. 125 of 2001 under Section 
307 IPC against the three accused persons at 7:30 am on oral 
information of the informant Santosh Mandley (PW-6), and proved the 
FIR (Ex-P/12) and his signature and the signature of the informant 
PW-6 which was marked as ‘A’ to ‘A’ on Ex P/12. Therefore, we have 
no reason to doubt the filing of the FIR which stands proved by the 
evidence of PW-14, the SHO.
32.	 It is to be noted that the informant PW-6 in his testimony did not 
deny the filing of the FIR, though denied having mentioned the 
names of the accused in the FIR during his testimony. Under the 
circumstances, it must be considered as to how far his denial can 
be believed contrary to his complaint and his previous statement 
made under Section 161 CrPC.
33.	 For better appreciation, the relevant portions of the FIR registered 
based on the statement of Santosh, PW-6 are reproduced below:
“I am residing near to the house of Shatrughna Sharma at 
Shikshak Colony and work as a dishwasher in their house. 
It is about an incident that has occurred on 23.9.01 at 
about 7 A.M. As usual, when I was clearing and washing 
the household utensils, from outside the house I could hear 
the shouts “Rescue me, Rescue me” and on alerted as 
such, I came out of the house from my work spot and saw 
676
Supreme Court Reports
that Suraj was being assaulted by Govardhan, Rajendra 
and their father Chintaram Sahu by using Pipe, Tangia 
etc. due to which Suraj’s body was drenched in blood. 
Govardhan hit with Tangia whereas Rajendra hit Suraj’s 
with pipe and Chintaram Sahu was kicking and giving first 
blows to Suraj and were instigating the other assaulters to 
beat Suraj to death by· abusing him meanwhile by calling 
the victim as “harlot’s son”. Immediately I informed Suraj’s 
parents about the said incident by alerting them. Guru, 
Bhau’s mother, and neighbouring residents have also 
witnessed the said incident. At 11 P.M. on the previous 
night, Suraj visited the house of Chintaram Sahu for 
asking him some Ganja Seeds where they had a quarrel 
there too when Chintaram has asked him why he visited 
his house for procuring Ganja. In the attack upon· Suraj 
that has occurred in the morning Suraj suffered serious 
injuries on head, both his hands, on the eyes which bleed 
too, thereby Suraj has become unconscious after which 
I am reporting this matter to you and request you to take 
necessary proceeding further.” 
34.	 From the aforesaid Complaint/FIR, it can be inferred that the 
informant who was examined by the prosecution as PW-6 would 
be an eyewitness. However, during the trial, he resiled from his 
narration and turned hostile by not mentioning the names of any of 
the three accused in his testimony though he had specified them 
as the assailants in the FIR.
35.	 Since PW-6, who was declared hostile is vital to understanding 
of the real picture that unfolded before the trial court, it may be 
appropriate to reproduce the relevant portions of the same as per 
records as follows:
“1. I know all the three members of the accused party 
present before me in this Court. Of them, one person’s 
name is known to me as Chintaram and the other two are 
his sons, but I don’t know their names .. I am not literate. 
I am staying in the house of Shatrughna Sharma _since 
past 2 -.2.5 years. I know Suraj, he is 1 - 2 years elder 
to me. It’s about an incident that occurred before about 
three months back. It was about 7 A.M. on that day. I was 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
677
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
engaged in dish washing at that time. In that particular 
house where I was washing the dishes at the relevant house 
of which the residents are ‘papa’ Shatrughna Sharma, 
‘mummy’ Lata Sharma,’sister’ Anju Sharma. When I was 
thus engaged in washing dishes of the said hold, these 
residents of the said house were sleeping. It that time, 
suddenly I heard the shouts “Rescue me, Rescue me”, I 
thought that Suraj is calling from outside and went outside, 
but could not see anybody present there, but Suraj was 
only lying on the ground flat. Then I went near him and 
saw that he was lying there unconscious. His temple and 
back portion of the head had injuries and blood was even 
scattered on the ground. 
2. It is correct to say that I have reported the matter in 
the Police Station and got it recorded in writing there. The 
report got dictated by me is marked Ex. P-12. On the said 
report my signature is ‘A to A’. The incident narrated to 
the police was told to them as seen by me. The police 
too recorded my statement. Although I am not a literate, 
but I know to write my signature. Whatever I knew, I have 
informed the same to the police.”
(emphasis added)
Because of the aforesaid discrepant testimony before the trial court 
where he omitted to mention the presence of any of the accused/
appellants as the assailants, PW-6 was declared hostile by the 
Prosecution.
36.	 We will also reproduce the remaining part of the testimony of PW-6 
in the course of the cross-examination as recorded which will indicate 
the nature of his evidence which are as follows:
“In the ‘B to B’ part of my police report Ex. P-12 I have 
not told them “I came out and saw .......... Killed him”. I 
have also dictated the police in my said report that the 
said incidence has also been witnessed by Bhuru Bai’s 
mother and neighborhood residents. In my Police Station 
I have not said that in the night at 11 o’clock Suraj went to 
the house of Chintaram to ask for ganja seeds regarding 
which Chintaram came to the house of Suraj and indulged 
678
Supreme Court Reports
in a brawl with him. But if in Ex. P-12, if it has not been 
mentioned the ‘C to C’ portion - “In the night, Suraj ........... 
why went to ask Ganja” has not been said to the police, 
but I do not know the reason for the police mentioning as 
such in Ex. P-12.
4. In my police report, I have not told them that when 
went out of the house I saw Suraj was being beaten by 
the accused party members with pipe, tangiya. Ex. P-8 
map too contains my signature. I have showed the place 
where Suraj was found lying to the Patwari. It is correct 
to say that on either sides of the road houses exist in 
Shikshak Colony.
5. It is correct to say that the houses of Shatrughan Sharma, 
Ram Kumar Sahu, Govardhan Sahu, Ramesh Kumar 
Varma and Pramila Pandey exist adjoining each other. It 
is· also correct to say that all these houses exist within 
a circumference of 30 - 40 foot. The distance between 
the place where I was washing the dishes and where the 
victim Suraj fell down was approximately 30 - 35 feet. It 
is also correct to say that if one shouts from the very spot 
where Suraj’s body was lying, the ‘call’ can be heard at 
the house of Shatrughan Sharma. After I started shouting, 
the neighbors woke-up.
6. In my Police station Ex. P-12, how police could write 
about the assault related matter of Suraj is not known 
to me or I do not even know the reason why they have 
written as such. On being persuaded the police, I put my 
signature· on ‘A to A’ part of Ex. P-12. I am not a literate, 
but still able to put my own signature. It is wrong to say 
that whatever I narrated to the police have been recorded 
by them as it is. I have not informed the police that the 
accused party members have assaulted Suraj. I can’t give 
any reason for the action of the Police who wrote like that 
on this own in Ex. P-12 as I do not know to read what 
they have written in it except putting my own signature. 
A copy of my report has not been issued to me by -the 
Police. The police have also not read over the contents 
of my report back to me. I have not come to know only 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
679
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
later that the brawl of Suraj occurred with the accused 
party members due to hearsay discussions going in our 
village. The accused party members too stay at a very 
short distance from the house of Shatrughan Sharma. The 
accused Chintaram never came to or visited the house of 
Shatrughan Sharma for Ganja usage. Not even to Suraj too.
8. It. is wrong to say that in order to protect the accused 
persons, I am not deposing correctly before the Court.
(emphasis added)
37.	 From the above, the following important aspects of the evidence of 
PW-6 emerge : 
(a)	 In paragraph no. 2 of his evidence in the cross examination 
PW-6 categorically states that, it is correct to say that he had 
reported the matter at the Police Station and got it recorded 
in writing there and also proved it which was marked as Ex. 
P/12 (FIR). He admitted the signature on Ex P/12 as his and 
he also testified that the incident was narrated to the police as 
seen by him. He also states that it was mentioned in the report 
that the incident was seen by Bhuri Bai and other passers-by. 
Thus, filing of the FIR by PW-6 is proved, though there is some 
controversy about its actual contents.
(b)	 It may be also noted that when asked, PW-6 merely states that 
he cannot tell the reason as to how the statement in respect of 
causing of assault to Suraj was recorded by the police in his 
statement in Ex P/12 and states that he had not stated the fact 
of assault by the appellants. From this, it is clear that he did 
not allege any coercion or threat meted out by the police to him 
to implicate the appellants falsely by naming them in the FIR, 
as alleged by some other witness (PW-2). Shailu, PW-2 who 
was produced by the Prosecution as a seizure memo witness 
to Ex-P/3 had claimed that the police obtained his signature 
by threatening him. As far as putting his signature on the 
FIR is concerned, he states that he was persuaded to do so. 
Thus, there can be no inference of wrongdoing or coercion by 
the police, if the police asked him to put his signature on the 
complaint, as the complainant is required to put the signature 
if present in the police station. After all it is not a statement 
680
Supreme Court Reports
recorded under Section 161 CrPC which does not require 
signature to be put, but the first information report is expected 
to be signed by the informant.
(c)	
PW-6 also states that if anyone shouts from the very spot where 
Suraj’s body was lying, the ‘call’ can be heard at the house 
of Shatrughan Sharma and as he shouted, on the day of the 
incident, the neighbours woke up. This indicates that when the 
incident happened, people were alerted. Hence, it was very 
natural for the mother of the victim, Lata Bai (PW-10) who was 
already in the house, being alerted and to witness the incident.
(d)	 PW-6 also stated that he came to know only later that a brawl 
occurred between Suraj and the accused party due to hearsay 
discussions going on in the village. He admitted that the accused 
persons were staying at a very short distance from the house 
of the deceased. Even if it is assumed that he did not know 
the identity of the assailants and came to know from the talk in 
the village about the involvement of the accused, the fact that 
there was no talk of involvement of others who were not the 
appellants assumes significance. The fact that there was no 
discussion of involvement of persons other than the appellants 
speaks volumes about what had happened. Further, no defence 
witness was produced from the village about the absence of 
the accused from the village on the fateful day or their non 
involvement in the incident. There was no witness categorically 
stating that the accused persons were not the assailants. The 
non official prosecution witnesses merely feigned ignorance 
of this incident. We are, however, not suggesting that merely 
because no one came forward to testify in defence of the 
accused, it should go against them, inasmuch as the onus is 
always on the prosecution to prove the charge and not the 
other way round. However, this is a circumstance which does 
not diminish the credibility of the eyewitness account of Lata 
Bai (PW-10) or prejudices the prosecution case.
(e)	 Thus, in our view, during the cross-examination, even if the PW-6 
had denied mentioning the names of the appellants to the police, 
it will be difficult to believe that he did not mention their names 
to the police when he himself stated that he informed the police 
what he saw and the police recorded the same in the FIR. We 
find it hard to believe that the police somehow wrote the names 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
681
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
of the appellants in the FIR on their own within such a short 
period of the occurrence by falsely implicating the appellants. 
The incident happened at about 7 am as mentioned in the FIR 
and the complaint was lodged at 7:30 am within half an hour 
of the incident on the basis of which the FIR was registered. 
Apparently, there was also a talk in the village of the assault 
by the appellants as also stated by PW-6.
38.	 From the above discussion, we have no reason to question the 
reliance placed on the FIR (Ex-P/12) by the trial court as well as the 
High Court as corroborating the prosecution case.
39.	 As discussed above, since the complainant (PW-6) who filed the 
FIR was initially projected as the eye witness but later turned hostile 
during the trial and it is only Lata Bai (PW-10) who claims to be 
the eye witness, it would be necessary to examine the evidence of 
Lata Bai (PW-10), as the prosecution case and the conviction by the 
Sessions Court and High Court are primarily based on her account. 
40.	 PW-10, Lata Bai is the mother of the deceased who was an eye 
witness as per the Prosecution. If it is established that this eye-witness 
testimony is credible and is corroborated by the other evidence 
on record as held by the trial court as well as the High Court, the 
conviction of the appellants cannot be said to be illegal and would 
not warrant interference from this Court. On the other hand, if her 
evidence is found to be not credible and not reliable as contended 
on behalf of the appellants, they would certainly be entitled to the 
benefit of doubt and would warrant reversing the decision of the 
courts below. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the evidence of 
the PW 10 in more detail.
41.	 PW-10, Lata Bai deposed to have witnessed the three accused 
including the present appellants assaulting the deceased, her son, 
on the fateful day as narrated below:
“I recognize all the three accused present in the court. 
Name of old man is Chintaram and the name of two 
sons are Govardhan and Raju. Accused persons reside 
at some distance from my house. Suraj was my son, he 
was running small shop from the house. It was incident of 
Sunday at 7:00 O’clock in the morning on 23 September. 
I was standing near the door with broom and my husband 
Shatrughan Sharma and daughter Anju Sharma were 
682
Supreme Court Reports
sleeping. My servant Santosh was cleaning utensil near 
the door of house. Santosh and Suraj went outside for 
excretion and come back from there. Suraj asked me to 
get the tea ready, he said that I am coming from Verma’s 
house. After 5 minute son of Verma came to me in my 
house and told that brother Suraj is sitting with father and 
has demanded Chilam, then the boy take Chilam and went 
away. After some time the same boy come to return the 
Chilam. Then after 10 minutes heard the voice of Suraj 
calling ‘papa’. My servant Santosh went outside the house 
and came inwards in a disturbed way and stated that they 
killed brother Suraj. I immediately came out with broom, 
Govardhan, Chinta and Raju, all three were causing attack 
over my son. Chintaram was armed with Pipe one accused 
was armed with small Axe and one with Adze. All three 
were assaulting Suraj and he was lying on earth. I went 
inside the house calling my husband. I got awaken my 
husband by pulling his hand that they had killed Suraj. 
When I and my husband reached near Suraj then all three 
accused person fled away after assaulting him. All three 
accused were saying “kill-kill”.
42.	 She also stated that she used to visit the house of the appellants 
quite frequently but was not aware of occurrence of any fight involving 
her husband or her son with the appellants. She also stated that her 
husband was already scared as soon as he went out and he told her 
to go to the police station and accordingly, she went to the police 
station. In the meantime, the appellants Rajendra and Govardhan 
too came to the police station and on seeing them she informed the 
police that these two persons had killed her son and these two also 
informed the police that they had come there after killing Suraj. Then 
the police detained both of them at the police station. Thereafter, 
the police accompanied her back to the Shikshak Colony, and with 
the assistance of police, she immediately took her injured son to 
the Government Hospital, Tilda on a rickshaw where he was given 
treatment and later was advised to be taken to Specialist Hospital 
at Mekahari.
43.	 She also deposed that when Suraj shouted for help, she came 
out and saw that many of her neighbours were already present at 
the place of the incident namely Verma, Shyam Bai, Bhoori, Bhau, 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
683
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
Govardhan alias Bhuru, Neelu, Kumari etc. and it was Verma (PW-9) 
who advised her to take her injured son immediately to the hospital. 
She then narrated how she took Suraj to the Government Hospital 
and then to the MMI Hospital for his treatment and she was present 
throughout the treatment till he expired. She was also present during 
the preparation of panchnama of the dead body. 
44.	 Since Lata Bai (PW-10) testified as the eye witness to the assault and 
had given a detailed account of the incident, she was subjected to a 
lengthy cross-examination by the defence to discredit her evidence. 
It is therefore, of utmost importance that her evidence be analysed 
minutely to ascertain whether the same is credible and trustworthy, 
which the defence has strenuously sought to project as such. 
45.	 A sustained endeavour was made by the defence counsel to establish 
that the deceased son of the PW-10 had a criminal background 
having been involved in numerous acts of brawls and hooliganism 
because of which he earned the enmity of many, thus suggesting 
that he could be a victim of retaliation or vengeance of his other 
enemies but not of the appellants. 
46.	 During the cross examination of PW-10, by way of suggestion there 
was a specific insinuation that the deceased had a quarrel with another 
neighbour, Verma (PW-9) the previous day and it was Verma’s family 
who had assaulted the deceased near the house of Verma. We shall 
refer to the testimony of the said Verma (PW-9) at a later stage.
47.	 The following aspects of the statement of the PW-10 during the 
cross-examination, deserve to be noticed.
(i)	
When asked whether the neighbours too had heard her son’s 
distress call, she stated, 
“I am also not sure whether they have heard the 
instigational calls of Chintaram who said “Beat him! 
Kill him” as my attention was upon son who was 
getting beaten at the relevant time I could not make 
any other observation in the surrounding keenly. I 
rushed out, saw him, then again rushed back inside 
and woke my husband, when any son was being 
beaten when I saw him, he has already fallen on the 
ground with his face too facing the ground.
684
Supreme Court Reports
(ii)	
She mentioned about the delayed response of her husband to 
the incident and her anger at her husband for not responding 
promptly on her urging to come out and abusing him as a “dog”. 
(iii)	 She stated that she had also gone to the police station and 
informed that the accused Goverdhan and Rajendra had 
assaulted her son and when they came to the Police Station, 
she slapped one of them in the police station.
(iv)	 She also stated that she did not inform the police that the 
accused party held weapons such as pipe, basoola and tangia 
as the police did not give any opportunity to tell all these nor 
did they enquire from her. She also states that police did not 
make a formal enquiry from her as she was in a state of shock.
(v)	
Interestingly, when a suggestion was made on behalf of the 
appellants during the cross-examination that police told her in 
the police station when she went to inform them that the report 
will be recorded later and they should visit to spot first, she 
admitted it to be correct.
(vi)	 She reiterates that she had seen with her own eyes the 
appellants fleeing away from the spot after assaulting Suraj.
(vii)	 She admits to have met and talked to Vaishnav, ASI (PW-15) 
outside the courtroom but denied her being pressured by him 
to give a statement as per their dictation that she did not see 
anybody assaulting Suraj.
48.	 The grounds for questioning the credibility and reliability of the 
evidence of the Lata Bai, PW-10 by the appellants may be stated 
below: -
(a)	 Her statement was recorded very belatedly after 5 days on 
28.09.2001 after the incident which occurred on 23.09.2001 
giving scope for fabrication.
(b)	 There are material contradictions in the statements made before 
the police and the court.
(c)	
There are improvements, and embellishments in her testimony 
before the court over the statement, recorded during the 
investigation.
(d)	 Her presence at the place of occurrence is doubtful as she is 
an interested witness who is not supported even by her own 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
685
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
husband (PW5) who was staying with her at the time of the 
incident.
(e)	 Her testimony is contradictory to the testimony of her husband 
who also was present in the house when the incident occurred, 
who apparently did not see the appellants assaulting their son.
(f)	
The name of Lata Bai was not mentioned as an eye-witness 
in the complaint/FIR, which would indicate that she was not 
an eyewitness.
49.	 It goes without saying that to be an eyewitness, the witness must 
have been at the place of occurrence or in the vicinity within the 
range of visibility when the incident occurred.
50.	 If we critically examine the other evidence on record, it cannot be 
said that Lata Bai (PW-10) did not see the incident.
For this, we will first refer to the evidence of Santosh (PW-6). Even 
though Santosh (PW-6) had claimed during his court testimony that 
he did not see who the assailants were, yet, in the cross-examination 
he specifically stated that it is true that the information of the incident 
was given immediately by him to the mother (PW-10) and father 
(PW-5) of Suraj. Therefore, the presence of Lata Bai near the place 
of occurrence cannot be doubted. It is to be noted that in the site 
map of the place of occurrence (Ex/16) it is mentioned that the body 
of the victim was found very near about 21ft on the lane opposite the 
house of the deceased. Thus, it cannot be said that it was impossible 
on her part to have witnessed the incident. PW-10 is not a chance 
witness but a natural witness. She did not suddenly appear at the 
place of occurrence where she was not expected to be present.
If the presence of Lata Bai (PW-10) at the place of occurrence 
cannot be doubted, the next consideration will be whether she had 
witnessed the incident when the appellants assaulted Suraj.
Therefore, the critical question is whether Lata Bai PW-10 saw 
the incident as claimed by her which has been questioned by the 
appellants.
51.	 As we proceed to examine this crucial aspect, it may be apposite 
to keep in mind certain observations made by this Court relating to 
discrepancies in the account of eye witnesses. 
686
Supreme Court Reports
In Leela Ram (Dead) through Duli Chand v. State of Haryana, 
(1999) 9 SCC 525 it was observed as follows:
“9. Be it noted that the High Court is within its jurisdiction 
being the first appellate court to reappraise the evidence, 
but the discrepancies found in the ocular account of two 
witnesses unless they are so vital, cannot affect the 
credibility of the evidence of the witnesses. There are 
bound to be some discrepancies between the narrations 
of different witnesses when they speak on details, and 
unless the contradictions are of a material dimension, 
the same should not be used to jettison the evidence in 
its entirety. Incidentally, corroboration of evidence with 
mathematical niceties cannot be expected in criminal 
cases. Minor embellishment, there may be, but variations 
by reason therefore should not render the evidence of 
eyewitnesses unbelievable. Trivial discrepancies ought 
not to obliterate an otherwise acceptable evidence. In 
this context, reference may be made to the decision of 
this Court in State of U.P. v. M.K. Anthony [(1985) 1 SCC 
505 : 1985 SCC (Cri) 105]. In para 10 of the Report, this 
Court observed : (SCC pp. 514-15)
‘10. While appreciating the evidence of a 
witness, the approach must be whether the 
evidence of the witness read as a whole appears 
to have a ring of truth. Once that impression 
is formed, it is undoubtedly necessary for the 
court to scrutinise the evidence more particularly 
keeping in view the deficiencies, drawbacks 
and infirmities pointed out in the evidence as 
a whole and evaluate them to find out whether 
it is against the general tenor of the evidence 
given by the witness and whether the earlier 
evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to 
render it unworthy of belief. Minor discrepancies 
on trivial matters not touching the core of 
the case, hypertechnical approach by taking 
sentences torn out of context here or there from 
the evidence, attaching importance to some 
technical error committed by the investigating 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
687
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
officer not going to the root of the matter would 
not ordinarily permit rejection of the evidence as 
a whole. If the court before whom the witness 
gives evidence had the opportunity to form the 
opinion about the general tenor of evidence 
given by the witness, the appellate court which 
had not this benefit will have to attach due 
weight to the appreciation of evidence by the 
trial court and unless there are reasons weighty 
and formidable it would not be proper to reject 
the evidence on the ground of minor variations 
or infirmities in the matter of trivial details. Even 
honest and truthful witnesses may differ in some 
details unrelated to the main incident because 
power of observation, retention and reproduction 
differ with individuals.’
10. In a very recent decision in Rammi v. State of M.P. 
[(1999) 8 SCC 649 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 26] this Court 
observed : (SCC p. 656, para 24)
‘24. When an eyewitness is examined at length it is quite 
possible for him to make some discrepancies. No true 
witness can possibly escape from making some discrepant 
details. Perhaps an untrue witness who is well tutored can 
successfully make his testimony totally non-discrepant. But 
courts should bear in mind that it is only when discrepancies 
in the evidence of a witness are so incompatible with 
the credibility of his version that the court is justified in 
jettisoning his evidence. But too serious a view to be 
adopted on mere variations falling in the narration of an 
incident (either as between the evidence of two witnesses 
or as between two statements of the same witness) is an 
unrealistic approach for judicial scrutiny.’
This Court further observed : (SCC pp. 656-57, paras 
25-27)
‘25. It is a common practice in trial courts to 
make out contradictions from the previous 
statement of a witness for confronting him 
during cross-examination. Merely because there 
688
Supreme Court Reports
is inconsistency in evidence it is not sufficient 
to impair the credit of the witness. No doubt 
Section 155 of the Evidence Act provides scope 
for impeaching the credit of a witness by proof of 
an inconsistent former statement. But a reading 
of the section would indicate that all inconsistent 
statements are not sufficient to impeach the 
credit of the witness. The material portion of 
the section is extracted below:
“155. Impeaching credit of witness.—The credit of a 
witness may be impeached in the following ways by the 
adverse party, or, with the consent of the court, by the 
party who calls him—
(1)-(2) ***
(3) by proof of former statements inconsistent with any 
part of his evidence which is liable to be contradicted;”
26. A former statement though seemingly inconsistent with 
the evidence need not necessarily be sufficient to amount 
to contradiction. Only such of the inconsistent statement 
which is liable to be “contradicted” would affect the credit of 
the witness. Section 145 of the Evidence Act also enables 
the cross-examiner to use any former statement of the 
witness, but it cautions that if it is intended to “contradict” the 
witness the cross-examiner is enjoined to comply with the 
formality prescribed therein. Section 162 of the Code also 
permits the cross-examiner to use the previous statement 
of the witness (recorded under Section 161 of the Code) 
for the only limited purpose i.e. to “contradict” the witness.
27. To contradict a witness, therefore, must be to discredit 
the particular version of the witness. Unless the former 
statement has the potency to discredit the present 
statement, even if the latter is at variance with the former 
to some extent it would not be helpful to contradict that 
witness (vide Tahsildar Singh v. State of U.P. [AIR 1959 
SC 1012 : 1959 Cri LJ 1231] ).’ ”
52.	 Further, this Court also cautioned about attaching too much 
importance on minor discrepancies of the evidence of the witnesses 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
689
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
in Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat (1983) 3 
SCC 217 as follows:
“5. … We do not consider it appropriate or permissible to 
enter upon a reappraisal or reappreciation of the evidence 
in the context of the minor discrepancies painstakingly 
highlighted by the learned counsel for the appellant. 
Overmuch importance cannot be attached to minor 
discrepancies. The reasons are obvious:
(1) By and large a witness cannot be expected to 
possess a photographic memory and to recall the 
details of an incident. It is not as if a video tape is 
replayed on the mental screen.
(2) Ordinarily it so happens that a witness is overtaken 
by events. The witness could not have anticipated 
the occurrence which so often has an element of 
surprise. The mental faculties therefore cannot be 
expected to be attuned to absorb the details.
(3) The powers of observation differ from person to 
person. What one may notice, another may not. An 
object or movement might emboss its image on one 
person’s mind, whereas it might go unnoticed on the 
part of another.
(4) By and large people cannot accurately recall a 
conversation and reproduce the very words used by 
them or heard by them. They can only recall the main 
purport of the conversation. It is unrealistic to expect 
a witness to be a human tape-recorder.
(5) In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time 
duration of an occurrence, usually, people make their 
estimates by guess work on the spur of the moment 
at the time of interrogation. And one cannot expect 
people to make very precise or reliable estimates in 
such matters. Again, it depends on the time-sense 
of individuals which varies from person to person.
(6) Ordinarily a witness cannot be expected to recall 
accurately the sequence of events which takes 
place in rapid succession or in a short time span. 
690
Supreme Court Reports
A witness is liable to get confused, or mixed up when 
interrogated later on.
(7) A witness, though wholly truthful, is liable to be 
overawed by the court atmosphere and the piercing 
cross-examination made by the counsel and out of 
nervousness mix up facts, get confused regarding 
sequence of events, or fill up details from imagination 
on the spur of the moment. The subconscious mind 
of the witness sometimes so operates on account of 
the fear of looking foolish or being disbelieved though 
the witness is giving a truthful and honest account 
of the occurrence witnessed by him—perhaps it is a 
sort of a psychological defence mechanism activated 
on the spur of the moment.”
53.	 To the same effect it was also observed in Appabhai v. State of 
Gujarat (1988) Supp SCC 241 as follows:
“13. … The court while appreciating the evidence must 
not attach undue importance to minor discrepancies. The 
discrepancies which do not shake the basic version of the 
prosecution case may be discarded. The discrepancies 
which are due to normal errors of perception or observation 
should not be given importance. The errors due to lapse 
of memory may be given due allowance. The court by 
calling into aid its vast experience of men and matters 
in different cases must evaluate the entire material on 
record by excluding the exaggerated version given by any 
witness. When a doubt arises in respect of certain facts 
alleged by such witness, the proper course is to ignore 
that fact only unless it goes into the root of the matter so 
as to demolish the entire prosecution story. The witnesses 
nowadays go on adding embellishments to their version 
perhaps for the fear of their testimony being rejected by 
the court. The courts, however, should not disbelieve the 
evidence of such witnesses altogether if they are otherwise 
trustworthy. Jaganmohan Reddy, J. speaking for this Court 
in Sohrab v. State of M.P. [(1972) 3 SCC 751 : 1972 SCC 
(Cri) 819] observed : [SCC p. 756, para 8 : SCC (Cri) p. 
824, para 8]
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
691
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
‘8. … This Court has held that falsus in uno, 
falsus in omnibus is not a sound rule for the 
reason that hardly one comes across a witness 
whose evidence does not contain a grain of 
untruth or at any rate exaggeration, embroideries 
or embellishments. In most cases, the witnesses 
when asked about details venture to give some 
answer, not necessarily true or relevant for 
fear that their evidence may not be accepted 
in respect of the main incident which they 
have witnessed but that is not to say that their 
evidence as to the salient features of the case 
after cautious scrutiny cannot be considered….’ ”
54.	 We must also remember that the scene of the crime was in a rural 
area and the witness being rustic, their evidence has to be appreciated 
in the light of the behavioral pattern in the rural environment. In this 
regard, we may refer to the decision of this Court in Shivaji Sahebrao 
Bobade v. State of Maharashtra, (supra) wherein it was held that:
“8. Now to the facts. The scene of murder is rural, the 
witnesses to the case are rustics and so their behavioural 
pattern and perceptive habits have to be judged as such. 
The too sophisticated approaches familiar in courts based 
on unreal assumptions about human conduct cannot 
obviously be applied to those given to the lethargic ways 
of our villages. When scanning the evidence of the various 
witnesses we have to inform ourselves that variances 
on the fringes, discrepancies in details, contradictions in 
narrations and embellishments in inessential parts cannot 
militate against the veracity of the core of the testimony 
provided there is the impress of truth and conformity to 
probability in the substantial fabric of testimony delivered. 
The learned Sessions Judge has at some length dissected 
the evidence, spun out contradictions and unnatural 
conduct, and tested with precision the time and sequence of 
the events connected with the crime, all on the touchstone 
of the medical evidence and the post-mortem certificate. 
Certainly, the court which has seen the witnesses depose, 
has a great advantage over the appellate Judge who 
reads the recorded evidence in cold print, and regard 
692
Supreme Court Reports
must be had to this advantage enjoyed by the trial Judge 
of observing the demeanour and delivery, of reading the 
straightforwardness and doubtful candour, rustic naiveté 
and clever equivocation, manipulated conformity and 
ingenious inveracity of persons who swear to the facts 
before him. Nevertheless, where a Judge draws his 
conclusions not so much on the directness or dubiety of 
the witness while on oath but upon general probabilities 
and on expert evidence, the court of appeal is in as good 
a position to assess or arrive at legitimate conclusions as 
the court of first instance. Nor can we make a fetish of 
the trial Judge’s psychic insight.”
55.	 This Court also reminded that while dealing with the evidence of 
witnesses who are rustic, because of minor inconsistencies, the 
evidence should not be ignored. It was held in in Prabhu Dayal v. 
State of Rajasthan, (2018) 8 SCC 127 wherein dealing with witnesses 
from rustic background it was observed as follows;
“18. It is a common phenomenon that the witnesses are 
rustic and can develop a tendency to exaggerate. This, 
however, does not mean that the entire testimony of 
such witnesses is falsehood. Minor contradictions in the 
testimony of the witnesses are not fatal to the case of the 
prosecution. This Court, in State of U.P. v. M.K. Anthony 
[State of U.P. v. M.K. Anthony, (1985) 1 SCC 505 : 1985 
SCC (Cri) 105], held that inconsistencies and discrepancies 
alone do not merit the rejection of the evidence as a whole. 
It stated as follows : (SCC p. 514-15, para 10)
“10. While appreciating the evidence of a witness, 
the approach must be whether the evidence of the 
witness read as a whole appears to have a ring of 
truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly 
necessary for the court to scrutinise the evidence 
more particularly keeping in view the deficiencies, 
drawbacks and infirmities pointed out in the evidence 
as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it 
is against the general tenor of the evidence given by 
the witness and whether the earlier evaluation of the 
evidence is shaken as to render it unworthy of belief. 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
693
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching the 
core of the case, hyper-technical approach by taking 
sentences torn out of context here or there from the 
evidence, attaching importance to some technical 
error committed by the investigating officer not going 
to the root of the matter would not ordinarily permit 
rejection of the evidence as a whole. If the court before 
whom the witness gives evidence had the opportunity 
to form the opinion about the general tenor of evidence 
given by the witness, the appellate court which had 
not this benefit will have to attach due weight to the 
appreciation of evidence by the trial court and unless 
there are reasons weighty and formidable it would 
not be proper to reject the evidence on the ground 
of minor variations or infirmities in the matter of trivial 
details. Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ 
in some details unrelated to the main incident because 
power of observation, retention and reproduction differ 
with individuals. Cross-examination is an unequal 
duel between a rustic and refined lawyer. Having 
examined the evidence of this witness, a friend and 
well-wisher of the family carefully giving due weight 
to the comments made by the learned counsel for 
the respondent and the reasons assigned to by the 
High Court for rejecting his evidence simultaneously 
keeping in view the appreciation of the evidence of 
this witness by the trial court, we have no hesitation 
in holding that the High Court was in error in rejecting 
the testimony of witness Nair whose evidence appears 
to us trustworthy and credible.”
(emphasis supplied)
19. … … … … … … … ….
20. The Court can separate the truth from the false 
statements in the witnesses’ testimony. In Leela Ram v. 
State of Haryana [Leela Ram v. State of Haryana, (1999) 
9 SCC 525 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 222] , this Court held as 
follows : (SCC p. 534, para 12)
694
Supreme Court Reports
“12. It is indeed necessary to note that one hardly 
comes across a witness whose evidence does not 
contain some exaggeration or embellishment — 
sometimes there could even be a deliberate attempt 
to offer embellishment and sometimes in their 
overanxiety they may give a slightly exaggerated 
account. The court can sift the chaff from the grain and 
find out the truth from the testimony of the witnesses. 
Total repulsion of the evidence is unnecessary. The 
evidence is to be considered from the point of view 
of trustworthiness. If this element is satisfied, it 
ought to inspire confidence in the mind of the court 
to accept the stated evidence though not however 
in the absence of the same.”
21. Moreover, it is not necessary that the entire testimony 
of a witness be disregarded because one portion of such 
testimony is false. This Court observed thus in Gangadhar 
Behera v. State of Orissa [Gangadhar Behera v. State of 
Orissa, (2002) 8 SCC 381 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 32] : (SCC 
p. 392, para 15)
“15. To the same effect is the decision in State of 
Punjab v. Jagir Singh [State of Punjab v. Jagir Singh, 
(1974) 3 SCC 277 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 886 : AIR 1973 
SC 2407] and Lehna v. State of Haryana [Lehna v. 
State of Haryana, (2002) 3 SCC 76 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 
526] . Stress was laid by the appellant-accused on 
the non-acceptance of evidence tendered by some 
witnesses to contend about desirability to throw out 
the entire prosecution case. In essence prayer is to 
apply the principle of falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus 
(false in one thing, false in everything). This plea 
is clearly untenable. Even if a major portion of the 
evidence is found to be deficient, in case residue is 
sufficient to prove guilt of an accused, notwithstanding 
acquittal of a number of other co-accused persons, 
his conviction can be maintained. It is the duty of the 
court to separate the grain from the chaff. Where chaff 
can be separated from the grain, it would be open 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
695
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
to the court to convict an accused notwithstanding 
the fact that evidence has been found to be deficient 
to prove guilt of other accused persons. Falsity of a 
particular material witness or material particular would 
not ruin it from the beginning to end. The maxim 
falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus has no application 
in India and the witnesses cannot be branded as 
liars. The maxim falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus 
has not received general acceptance nor has this 
maxim come to occupy the status of rule of law. It 
is merely a rule of caution. All that it amounts to, is 
that in such cases testimony may be disregarded, 
and not that it must be disregarded.”
56.	 Keeping the aforesaid observations of this Court in mind, we will 
examine the evidence of the mother of the deceased, Lata Bai, 
PW-10. The High Court had meticulously examined the evidence of 
PW-10 before coming to the conclusion that her evidence is reliable 
and credible.
57.	 Much emphasis was laid on the plea of delayed recording of the 
statement of PW-10 by the defence, which was duly considered 
by the High Court. The High Court observed that the Investigating 
Officer (IO) was not questioned as to why there was a delay in the 
examination of the witness, failing which the defence cannot gain 
any advantage therefrom. 
In this regard, we may refer to the decision of this Court in the State 
of U.P. v. Satish, (supra), wherein it was held that,
“18. As regards delayed examination of certain witnesses, 
this Court in several decisions has held that unless the 
investigating officer is categorically asked as to why there 
was delay in examination of the witnesses the defence 
cannot gain any advantage therefrom. It cannot be laid 
down as a rule of universal application that if there is 
any delay in examination of a particular witness the 
prosecution version becomes suspect. It would depend 
upon several factors. If the explanation offered for the 
delayed examination is plausible and acceptable and the 
court accepts the same as plausible, there is no reason 
to interfere with the conclusion. (See Ranbir v. State of 
696
Supreme Court Reports
Punjab [(1973) 2 SCC 444 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 858 : AIR 
1973 SC 1409] , Bodhraj v. State of J&K [(2002) 8 SCC 
45 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 201] and Banti v. State of M.P. [(2004) 
1 SCC 414 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 294] )
19. ……………………………………..
20. It is to be noted that the explanation when offered 
by the IO on being questioned on the aspect of delayed 
examination by the accused hhas to be tested by the 
court on the touchstone of credibility. If the explanation is 
plausible then no adverse inference can be drawn. On the 
other hand, if the explanation is found to be implausible, 
certainly the court can consider it to be one of the factors 
to affect credibility of the witnesses who were examined 
belatedly. It may not have any effect on the credibility of the 
prosecution’s evidence tendered by the other witnesses.”
58.	 In the present case, we have also noted that, no such question was 
asked by the defence from the IO about the delayed recording of 
the statement of PW-10. The witness was also not asked about it, 
which would have afforded an opportunity to the witness to explain 
the reason for such a delayed recording of her evidence. Hence, 
such a plea could not be taken now to discredit PW-10.
Moreover, what we have noticed, as also observed by the High 
Court is that PW-10 being the mother and on seeing the serious 
condition of her injured son was more concerned about his well-
being and survival and rushed to the Police Station for informing 
the police about the incident, and thereafter, she immediately went 
to the government hospital taking her injured son and thereafter to 
other specialist hospitals for treatment. She was throughout with 
the injured son for his treatment till he succumbed to the injuries. 
Thus, she was busy in getting proper treatment of her injured son 
and was not in the village till she returned after the death of her son 
and she was present also when the post-mortem examination was 
conducted. Therefore, if PW-10 was preoccupied with the treatment 
of her son soon after the incident and her statement under Section 
161 CrPC could not be recorded earlier, it could not render her 
evidence untrustworthy, more so when her presence in the house 
when the incident occurred was proved by the evidence of PW-6, 
the informant, who is not a member of the family of the deceased.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
697
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
59.	 PW-10 claimed that she had rushed to the Police Station to inform 
about the incident and the police told her that they would go to the 
place of occurrence first and would later record her evidence. That 
she went to the Police Station is also supported by the evidence of 
her husband (PW-5), who testified that after he and his wife (PW-10) 
came out of the house and saw their injured son, he immediately 
sent his wife to the police station. It may be also noted that the 
defence did not cross examine PW-5 at all including on this aspect, 
perhaps in view of his non mentioning the names of the accused 
as assailants, because of which he was declared a hostile witness 
by the court at the instance of the Prosecution. 
As mentioned above, PW-10 agreed to the suggestion made on 
behalf of the appellants during the cross-examination that police 
told her in the police station when she went to inform them that the 
report will be recorded later and they should visit to spot first. Her 
response was in the following words: 
“It is true to say that police person asked me that your 
report will be recorded later, let’s visit the spot first.” 
This suggestion from the defence neutralises the very plea of the 
defence on the issue of delay in recording the statement of PW-10. 
This is also natural for the reason that since PW-10, the mother was 
in a state of shock and was more interested in the treatment of her 
son, if the police did not record the statement of PW-10 at that time, 
it could not be said to be abnormal. We are of the view that under 
the circumstances, the delay in recording the statement of PW-10 
under Section 161 CrPC can not be said to be a deliberate act on the 
part of the Investigating Officer to manipulate or fabricate evidence 
to falsely implicate innocent persons. Accordingly, we are of the view 
that the decision in State of Orissa vs. Brahmanada Nanda (supra) 
relied upon by the appellants is not applicable in the present case. 
In the said case, the High Court as well as this Court did not find the 
evidence of the sole eye witness trustworthy for not mentioning the 
name of the accused for one and a half day and declined to accept 
her plea of fear of the accused by not naming him as the police and 
her nephew had already arrived at the scene and that the accused 
was not known to be a gangster or a confirmed criminal of whom 
people would be afraid. In the said case this Court also found that 
there were many other reasons assigned by the High Court in not 
believing the evidence of the said sole witness.
698
Supreme Court Reports
60.	 We have also considered the evidence of Shatrughan Sharma, PW-5, 
the father of the deceased who denied having seen the appellants 
assaulting his son on whose evidence, the defence has harped much 
to contend that he being the father of the victim did not support his 
wife’s evidence. He stated in the examination-in-chief that on the 
fateful day when he was sleeping he was woken up by his wife, Lata 
Bai (PW-10) informing that there was a quarrel outside the house 
and when he came out he saw blood spread everywhere and his 
son drenched in blood and he then immediately sent his wife to the 
police station. He also saw some other neighbours standing near 
the body of his son. During the cross examination he denied having 
mentioned the names of the appellants in his statement recorded 
under Section 161 CrPC.
61.	 What is to be noted is that his wife Lata Bai (PW-10) stated that after 
seeing the assault of her son by the appellants, she went inside the 
house and woke up her husband and came out pulling his hands 
and when both of them reached the place of occurrence, all the 
assailants had fled.
It may be also noted that PW-10 in the cross-examination stated that 
after her husband was woken up, he rather than rush to the scene, 
was looking for his shoes to which the PW-10 abused him calling 
him a “dog” and only then he came out in his underwear. Thus, 
from this statement of PW-10, it can be clearly inferred that PW-5 
could not have seen the assailants. Thus, there is no question of 
his testimony being contrary to the evidence of PW-10, since PW-5 
did not witness the assault. Thus, the evidence of PW-5 does not 
contradict the evidence of PW-10 and supports her on certain critical 
areas as discussed above.
62.	 What we have also noted is that Shatrughan Sharma, PW-5 in the 
cross examination clearly admits his close association with the father 
of the appellants, Chintaram on account of smoking of ganja. PW-5 
admits that he used to consume ganja and liquor. He also stated 
that he and Chintaram, the acquitted father of the appellants, were 
regular smokers of ganja.
It may be also noted that in the cross-examination by the Prosecution 
after PW-5 was declared a hostile witness, he stated (as per the 
case court records) as follows: 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
699
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
“ (8) … … It is true that I and Chintaram had smoked Ganja 
several times together. It is true that I also came to the 
court yesterday. It is true that I and Chintaram hugged each 
other. It is also true that all the three accused obeisance 
my leg. … … … ….”
Thus, in spite of denials to the suggestion that due to old friendship 
he was not giving statements against accused persons, it is apparent 
that he was won over, as otherwise, there was no reason for the 
accused to be so warm to him and all the three accused pay obeisance 
to him by touching his feet.
63.	 If we examine the evidence of PW-10 in the light of other evidence 
brought on record and proved by the Prosecution, it can be seen 
that the evidence of PW-10 stands corroborated and hence, we have 
no reason to disbelieve the evidence of PW-10.
64.	 We have taken note of the fact that the High Court had noticed 
that the victim Suraj was examined by Dr G.R. Agarwal (PW-1) on 
23.9.2001 at about 8 a.m. which is about one hour after the assault 
vide Ex.P/1 and in the said document, the names of the two appellants, 
Goverdhan and Rajendra were mentioned as the ones who had 
assaulted the victim by axe and iron pipe but the name of the third 
accused Chintaram was not mentioned. Though mere mention of 
the names of the two appellants in the said medical record may 
not be the basis to implicate the two appellants, yet, it provides the 
circumstances in which the victim came to be brought to the hospital 
and thus, lends credence to the truthfulness of the contents of the 
FIR in which the appellants were named as the assailants.
65.	 The noting made by the doctor on the medical record that the 
appellants, Goverdhan and Rajendra were the ones who assaulted 
the victims can partake the character of hearsay evidence, yet, 
this was recorded within about half an hour of the filing of the FIR 
in the police station and within about one hour of incident and is 
directly related to the incident. Though the medical report was not 
made immediately after the incident, it was made without much time 
gap and it was made almost contemporaneously with the incident. 
Further, the medical record was in conformity with the FIR filed by 
the complainant, PW-6, thus corroborating the contents of the FIR in 
which the appellants were named as the assailants. In our opinion, 
since the FIR was filed soon after the incident occurred and the 
700
Supreme Court Reports
names of the appellants were again mentioned in the medical record 
as the assailants within a very short span of time, there was hardly 
any scope for fabrication of evidence and falsely implicating the 
appellants in the case, as they were already named in the FIR. The 
matter would have been otherwise, if the names of the appellants 
were not mentioned in the FIR but subsequently mentioned in the 
medical record in which event, a valid plea could be taken by the 
defence that it was an afterthought. However, such is not the situation 
in the present case. 
66.	 We must also keep in mind that in a trial, the assessment of evidence 
cannot be made in a technical manner and the realities of life must 
be kept in mind for arriving at the truth as observed by this Court in 
State of H.P. v. Lekh Raj (2000) 1 SCC 247 as follows;
“10. The High Court appears to have adopted a technical 
approach in disposing of the appeal filed by the respondents. 
This Court in State of Punjab v. Jagir Singh [(1974) 3 SCC 
277 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 886] held: (SCC pp. 285-86, para 23)
‘23. A criminal trial is not like a fairy tale wherein one 
is free to give flight to one’s imagination and fantasy. It 
concerns itself with the question as to whether the accused 
arraigned at the trial is guilty of the crime with which he is 
charged. Crime is an event in real life and is the product 
of interplay of different human emotions. In arriving at the 
conclusion about the guilt of the accused charged with the 
commission of a crime, the court has to judge the evidence 
by the yardstick of probabilities, its intrinsic worth and 
the animus of witnesses. Every case in the final analysis 
would have to depend upon its own facts. Although the 
benefit of every reasonable doubt should be given to the 
accused, the courts should not at the same time reject 
evidence which is ex facie trustworthy on grounds which 
are fanciful or in the nature of conjectures.’
The criminal trial cannot be equated with a mock scene 
from a stunt film. The legal trial is conducted to ascertain 
the guilt or innocence of the accused arraigned. In arriving 
at a conclusion about the truth, the courts are required 
to adopt a rational approach and judge the evidence by 
its intrinsic worth and the animus of the witnesses. The 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
701
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
hypertechnicalities or figment of imagination should not 
be allowed to divest the court of its responsibility of sifting 
and weighing the evidence to arrive at the conclusion 
regarding the existence or otherwise of a particular 
circumstance keeping in view the peculiar facts of each 
case, the social position of the victim and the accused, 
the larger interests of the society particularly the law and 
order problem and degrading values of life inherent in the 
prevalent system. The realities of life have to be kept in 
mind while appreciating the evidence for arriving at the 
truth. The courts are not obliged to make efforts either to 
give latitude to the prosecution or loosely construe the 
law in favour of the accused. The traditional dogmatic 
hypertechnical approach has to be replaced by a rational, 
realistic and genuine approach for administering justice in a 
criminal trial. Criminal jurisprudence cannot be considered 
to be a utopian thought but have to be considered as part 
and parcel of the human civilisation and the realities of 
life. The courts cannot ignore the erosion in values of life 
which are a common feature of the present system. Such 
erosions cannot be given a bonus in favour of those who 
are guilty of polluting society and mankind.”
67.	 As regards the seizure of the weapons of crime, the Investigating 
Officer (IO) Ram Kumar Vaishnav, (PW-15) testified that at the 
instance of the Appellant No. 1 (Goverdhan), the small axe was 
recovered and the Panchanama was prepared (Ex-P/3). Similarly, one 
iron pipe was recovered at the instance of Appellant No.2, Rajendra 
and the Panchanama (Ex-P/5) was prepared. Both the seizures were 
witnessed by Shailu (PW-2) and Kanhaiya (PW-12). Though the IO 
(PW-15) proved his signature and preparation of the aforesaid two 
seizure memos, both the witnesses turned hostile claiming that they 
merely put their signatures at the instance of the police and they put 
their signatures on blank forms.
What is important to note is that these two witnesses, however, did 
admit putting their signatures on the seizure memos. What they 
pleaded is that they did so at the instance/threat of the police and 
they did not know what was written on these documents. They also 
stated that the seizure was not preceded by any enquiry by the 
police from the accused persons.
702
Supreme Court Reports
It is also to be noted that while both the witnesses, Shailu (PW-2) and 
Kanhaiya (PW-11) were from the same village, Tilda where the murder 
took place and both of them claimed that they had no knowledge 
of this case, both of them admitted that they knew the appellants. 
Shailu (PW-2) stated that he knew the appellants and they resided 
at some distance from his house. In the cross-examination, Shailu, 
PW-2 claims that he had no knowledge of the case.
Kanhaiya, PW-11, the other seizure witness, admits that the seizure 
memo was prepared in his presence, and the police asked him to 
put his signature on the same and admitted his signature, though he 
also stated that no seizure was made from the Appellant Rajendra 
in his presence. He also states that the police seized the small axe 
and showed it to both the witnesses and police informed that the 
axe was found in the house of the appellants.
In his cross-examination by the Prosecution after being declared 
hostile, PW-11, admitted that he used to smoke ganja with the 
appellants often and whenever he used to pass through the Teachers 
Colony, he used to stay with Chintaram, the acquitted accused and 
father of the two appellants for smoking ganja and admitted being 
familiar with Chintaram. He, however, denied the suggestion of the 
Prosecution that he was not telling the truth as he was well acquainted 
with Chintaram.
68.	 Thus, what emerges from the above is that both the seizure witnesses 
have not denied their signatures on the seizure memo and admitted 
putting their signatures. PW-11 even goes to the extent that the police 
showed to them a small axe which the police said was seized from 
the house of the appellants.
Though both the witnesses have denied having any knowledge of 
the actual recovery of the weapons at the instance of the appellants, 
their denials do not appear convincing. However, since the IO of the 
case, PW-15 had proved the said seizure memos, we find no reason 
to hold that there was no seizure that was affected merely because 
the two seizure witnesses had turned hostile.
It may be noted that the axes were seized on the same day of the 
incident on 23.9.2001 at 4:45 pm and these were blood stained as 
recorded in Ex-P/6 and also mentioned by Dr. G.R. Agarwal, PW-1 
while forwarding these items for chemical examination.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
703
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
69.	 Even assuming that the seizure of the weapons was effected without 
meticulously following the procedures and thus doubtful, in the view 
of the medical evidence which clearly showed that the deceased died 
because of the injuries caused by sharp weapon which was seen 
by a direct eye witness, namely, Lata Bai (PW-10), in our opinion, 
it would not prejudice the prosecution case. The doctor (PW-1) 
who examined the victim testified that he examined the weapons 
of crime on 29.9.2001 which were brought to him by the police in a 
sealed packet and he opined that the injuries no. (ii), (iii), (iv), (vi) 
and (vii) may be caused by the sharp edge of an axe and injuries 
no. (i), (vi), (viii) and (ix) may be caused by the iron pipe. There 
was no cross examination of this witness PW-1 by the defence on 
this crucial medical evidence. Thus, this medical opinion remained 
unshaken, which supports the prosecution case and evidence of 
Lata Bai, PW-10.
70.	 It is now well settled that non recovery of the weapon of crime is not 
fatal to the prosecution case and is not sine qua non for conviction, 
if there are direct reliable witnesses as held in Rakesh v. State of 
U.P., (2021) 7 SCC 188, wherein it was observed as follows:
“12. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the accused 
that as per the ballistic report the bullet found does not 
match with the firearm/gun recovered and therefore the 
use of gun as alleged is doubtful and therefore benefit 
of doubt must be given to the accused is concerned, the 
aforesaid cannot be accepted. At the most, it can be said 
that the gun recovered by the police from the accused 
may not have been used for killing and therefore the 
recovery of the actual weapon used for killing can be 
ignored and it is to be treated as if there is no recovery 
at all. For convicting an accused recovery of the weapon 
used in commission of offence is not a sine qua non. PW 
1 and PW 2, as observed hereinabove, are reliable and 
trustworthy eyewitnesses to the incident and they have 
specifically stated that A-1 Rakesh fired from the gun and 
the deceased sustained injury. The injury by the gun has 
been established and proved from the medical evidence 
and the deposition of Dr Santosh Kumar, PW 5. Injury 1 is 
by gunshot. Therefore, it is not possible to reject the credible 
704
Supreme Court Reports
ocular evidence of PW 1 and PW 2 — eyewitnesses who 
witnessed the shooting. It has no bearing on credibility of 
deposition of PW 1 and PW 2 that A-1 shot deceased with 
a gun, particularly as it is corroborated by bullet in the body 
and also stands corroborated by the testimony of PW 2 
and PW 5. Therefore, merely because the ballistic report 
shows that the bullet recovered does not match with the 
gun recovered, it is not possible to reject the credible and 
reliable deposition of PW 1 and PW 2.
(emphasis added)
71.	 In this context one may also refer to the decision of this Court in 
Karamjit Singh v. State (Delhi Admn.), (2003) 5 SCC 291 in which 
it was observed that the testimony of the police personnel involved 
in recovery of articles need not be disbelieved and testimony of 
police personnel is to be treated similarly as testimony of any other 
witness. It was held that,
“8. Shri Sinha, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant, 
has vehemently urged that all the witnesses of recovery 
examined by the prosecution are police personnel and in 
the absence of any public witness, their testimony alone 
should not be held sufficient for sustaining the conviction 
of the appellant. In our opinion the contention raised is too 
broadly stated and cannot be accepted. The testimony of 
police personnel should be treated in the same manner as 
testimony of any other witness and there is no principle of 
law that without corroboration by independent witnesses 
their testimony cannot be relied upon. The presumption 
that a person acts honestly applies as much in favour 
of a police personnel as of other persons and it is not 
a proper judicial approach to distrust and suspect them 
without good grounds. It will all depend upon the facts and 
circumstances of each case and no principle of general 
application can be laid down. … … … … … … … …..”
(emphasis added)
Thus, we do not find any reason to doubt the testimony of the 
police/I.O. (PW-15).
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
705
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
72.	 It is to be noted that the plea of the defence is of total denial. The 
appellants also claimed complete ignorance of the incident. They have 
taken the plea that they were not in the village during the time of the 
incident and had gone on 22.9.2001 to another place at Nayapara, 
to attend the housewarming ceremony of one Champa Lal Sahu on 
23.09.2001 and returned only in the evening of 23.09.2001. However, 
the defence did not lead any evidence about the plea of alibi.
The appellants also sought to put the blame of assault to Ramesh 
Kumar Verma, PW-9 which miserably failed.
They also took the plea that the prosecution witnesses, more 
particularly PW-10, were coerced by the police to falsely implicate 
the accused in support of which the appellants had adduced two 
defence witnesses. However, we find their evidence unconvincing 
as also held by the High Court.
73.	 We have also noted the testimonies of other neighbours, which we 
consider to be highly unnatural and untruthful and they appear to be 
reluctant to come up with the truth in order to protect the appellants. 
Shyam Bai, PW-3, who was mentioned by PW-6, the complainant 
and both the husband and wife, PW-5 and PW-10 (parents of the 
deceased) to have been present at the place of occurrence feigned 
ignorance of the cause of the death of Suraj and did not support her 
previous statement recorded under Section 161CrPC where she had 
named the appellants as the assailants. In the cross -examination, 
she stated that when she came after bath, she saw the mother and 
father of Suraj taking the injured in a rickshaw and saw blood on 
the body, but she did not ask how the injured suffered the injuries. 
It defies logic and appears to be contrary to human instinct and 
nature that when a person sees a neighbour in a seriously injured 
condition, no query is made about the injury. PW-3 obviously is not 
telling the truth.
74.	 Same is the case with Ramesh Kumar Verma, PW-9, in front of 
whose house the incident occurred and an immediate neighbour of 
the deceased. He was also named by both PW-5 and PW-10 to be 
present at the place of occurrence and at the time of occurrence. 
However, he categorically states that, he was having no knowledge of 
the incident and that he had neither seen nor heard of what happened 
to the victim. It is very strange and rather unbelievable that though 
706
Supreme Court Reports
he admitted seeing blood spread over in the corner of his garden, 
he did not make any query about it. He states that he read about 
the news of the death of a boy in the newspaper and he came to 
know about the injuries received by Suraj from the newspaper and 
that he did not have any knowledge as to who had killed Suraj. He 
also admits that he drinks liquor and that Chintaram used to drink 
liquor with him and had good terms with Chintaram till date.
Interestingly, the appellants made unsubstantiated suggestion to 
PW-10 that Verma (PW-9) and his family had in fact assaulted the 
deceased.
The only inference we can draw is that the statement of PW-9 is 
untrue, being highly unnatural and defying normal human instinct and 
behaviour and he appears to have been influenced by Chintaram 
because of his close acquaintance as a comrade in arms in drinking, 
which relationship he admitted in the cross examination.
75.	 Because of the unnaturalness of the testimonies of these neighbours 
before the court, which defy human behaviour, the reasonable 
inference one can draw is that these witnesses have been won 
over. The fact that all these witnesses had close association with 
Chintaram on account of consumption of ganja also clearly indicates 
the influence Chintraram, the acquitted father of the present two 
appellants may have on these witnesses.
76.	 However, it is also to be noted that merely because the witnesses 
turn hostile does not necessarily mean that their evidence has to be 
thrown out entirely and what is supportive of the prosecution certainly 
be used. In Gangadhar Behera v. State of Orissa (2002) 8 SCC 
381, it was observed as following:-
“15. To the same effect is the decision in State of Punjab v. 
Jagir Singh [(1974) 3 SCC 277 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 886] 
and Lehna v. State of Haryana [(2002) 3 SCC 76 : 2002 
SCC (Cri) 526] . Stress was laid by the appellant-accused 
on the non-acceptance of evidence tendered by some 
witnesses to contend about desirability to throw out the 
entire prosecution case. In essence prayer is to apply the 
principle of falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus (false in one 
thing, false in everything). This plea is clearly untenable. 
Even if a major portion of the evidence is found to be 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
707
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
deficient, in case residue is sufficient to prove guilt of an 
accused, notwithstanding acquittal of a number of other 
co-accused persons, his conviction can be maintained. It is 
the duty of the court to separate the grain from the chaff. 
Where chaff can be separated from the grain, it would be 
open to the court to convict an accused notwithstanding 
the fact that evidence has been found to be deficient to 
prove guilt of other accused persons. Falsity of a particular 
material witness or material particular would not ruin it 
from the beginning to end. The maxim falsus in uno, falsus 
in omnibus has no application in India and the witnesses 
cannot be branded as liars. The maxim falsus in uno, 
falsus in omnibus has not received general acceptance 
nor has this maxim come to occupy the status of the rule 
of law. It is merely a rule of caution. All that it amounts 
to, is that in such cases testimony may be disregarded, 
and not that it must be disregarded. The doctrine merely 
involves the question of weight of evidence which a court 
may apply in a given set of circumstances, but it is not 
what may be called ‘a mandatory rule of evidence’. (See 
Nisar Ali v. State of U.P. [AIR 1957 SC 366 : 1957 Cri 
LJ 550] ) Merely because some of the accused persons 
have been acquitted, though evidence against all of them, 
so far as direct testimony went, was the same does not 
lead as a necessary corollary that those who have been 
convicted must also be acquitted. It is always open to a 
court to differentiate the accused who had been acquitted 
from those who were convicted. (See Gurcharan Singh v. 
State of Punjab [AIR 1956 SC 460 : 1956 Cri LJ 827] .) 
The doctrine is a dangerous one especially in India for if a 
whole body of the testimony were to be rejected, because 
a witness was evidently speaking an untruth in some 
aspect, it is to be feared that administration of criminal 
justice would come to a dead stop. Witnesses just cannot 
help in giving embroidery to a story, however, true in the 
main. Therefore, it has to be appraised in each case as 
to what extent the evidence is worthy of acceptance, and 
merely because in some respects the court considers 
the same to be insufficient for placing reliance on the 
testimony of a witness, it does not necessarily follow as 
708
Supreme Court Reports
a matter of law that it must be disregarded in all respects 
as well. The evidence has to be sifted with care. The 
aforesaid dictum is not a sound rule for the reason that 
one hardly comes across a witness whose evidence does 
not contain a grain of untruth or at any rate exaggeration, 
embroideries or embellishment. (See Sohrab v. State of 
M.P. [(1972) 3 SCC 751 : 1972 SCC (Cri) 819] and Ugar 
Ahir v. State of Bihar [AIR 1965 SC 277 : (1965) 1 Cri LJ 
256] .) An attempt has to be made to, as noted above, 
in terms of felicitous metaphor, separate the grain from 
the chaff, truth from falsehood. Where it is not feasible 
to separate the truth from falsehood, because grain and 
chaff are inextricably mixed up, and in the process of 
separation an absolutely new case has to be reconstructed 
by divorcing essential details presented by the prosecution 
completely from the context and the background against 
which they are made, the only available course to be 
made is to discard the evidence in toto. (See Zwinglee 
Ariel v. State of M.P. [(1952) 2 SCC 560 : AIR 1954 SC 
15 : 1954 Cri LJ 230] and Balaka Singh v. State of Punjab 
[(1975) 4 SCC 511 : 1975 SCC (Cri) 601] .) As observed 
by this Court in State of Rajasthan v. Kalki [(1981) 2 
SCC 752 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 593] normal discrepancies 
in evidence are those which are due to normal errors of 
observation, normal errors of memory due to lapse of 
time, due to mental disposition such as shock and horror 
at the time of occurrence and those are always there 
however honest and truthful a witness may be. Material 
discrepancies are those which are not normal, and not 
expected of a normal person. Courts have to label the 
category to which a discrepancy may be categorised. 
While normal discrepancies do not corrode the credibility 
of a party’s case, material discrepancies do so. These 
aspects were highlighted recently in Krishna Mochi v. 
State of Bihar [(2002) 6 SCC 81 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 1220] . 
Accusations have been clearly established against the 
appellant-accused in the case at hand. The courts below 
have categorically indicated the distinguishing features 
in evidence so far as the acquitted and the convicted 
accused are concerned.”
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
709
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
77.	 To the same effect it was held in Raja v. State of Karnataka, (2016) 
10 SCC 506 as follows:
“32. That the evidence of a hostile witness in all eventualities 
ought not stand effaced altogether and that the same 
can be accepted to the extent found dependable on a 
careful scrutiny was reiterated by this Court in Himanshu 
[Himanshu v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2011) 2 SCC 36 : 
(2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 593] by drawing sustenance of the 
proposition amongst others from Khujji v. State of M.P. 
[Khujji v. State of M.P., (1991) 3 SCC 627 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 
916] and Koli Lakhmanbhai Chanabhai v. State of Gujarat 
[Koli Lakhmanbhai Chanabhai v. State of Gujarat, (1999) 
8 SCC 624 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 13] . It was announced that 
the evidence of a hostile witness remains admissible and is 
open for a court to rely on the dependable part thereof as 
found acceptable and duly corroborated by other reliable 
evidence available on record.”
78.	 We are also mindful of the position of law that the prosecution 
must stand or fall on its own legs and it cannot derive any strength 
from the weakness of the defence. However, in the present case, 
inspite of the untruthful and evasive testimony of the neighbours, 
the prosecution has been able to prove its case beyond reasonable 
doubt and the false plea of the appellants only strengthens the case 
of the prosecution.
79.	 There is no compelling reason or such material on record on the 
basis of which this Court should take the view that Lata Bai (PW-
10), did not really witness the assault of the victim by the appellants. 
Merely because her statement under Section 161 CrPC was recorded 
belatedly i.e. after five days which have been duly considered by the 
High Court and there are some inconsistencies and embellishments 
in her testimony before the trial court, we are not persuaded to take 
the view that PW-10 cannot be an eye-witness and her testimony 
not credible.
PW-10 was subjected to intense and extensive cross-examination 
by the defence, yet her testimony could not materially be shaken, 
except for pointing out minor discrepancies.
No material contradiction between the statement made by her before 
the court and the previous statement recorded under Section 161 
710
Supreme Court Reports
CrPC could be shown by the defence under Section 162 (1) and 
Explanation thereto as to render her testimony doubtful. 
A careful perusal of the testimony of PW-10 shows that her narration 
of the incident was natural, and trustworthy.
80.	 The appellants had also contended that the PW-10 was an interested 
witness and her testimony may not be believable. In this regard, it 
must be noted that PW-10, the mother of the deceased though was 
related to the victim cannot by any stretch of imagination be said to 
be an interested witness. As to who is an “interested witness” and 
the “related witness” has been succinctly explained by this Court in 
the case of Mohd. Rojali Ali Vs. The State of Assam, (2019) 19 
SCC 567, wherein it was held that:
“13. As regards the contention that all the eyewitnesses 
are close relatives of the deceased, it is by now well-
settled that a related witness cannot be said to be an 
“interested” witness merely by virtue of being a relative 
of the victim. This Court has elucidated the difference 
between “interested” and “related” witnesses in a plethora 
of cases, stating that a witness may be called interested 
only when he or she derives some benefit from the result 
of a litigation, which in the context of a criminal case would 
mean that the witness has a direct or indirect interest in 
seeing the accused punished due to prior enmity or other 
reasons, and thus has a motive to falsely implicate the 
accused (for instance, see State of Rajasthan v. Kalki [State 
of Rajasthan v. Kalki, (1981) 2 SCC 752 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 
593] ; Amit v. State of U.P. [Amit v. State of U.P., (2012) 4 
SCC 107 : (2012) 2 SCC (Cri) 590] ; and Gangabhavani v. 
Rayapati Venkat Reddy [Gangabhavani v. Rayapati Venkat 
Reddy, (2013) 15 SCC 298 : (2014) 6 SCC (Cri) 182] ). 
Recently, this difference was reiterated in Ganapathiv. 
State of T.N. [Ganapathi v. State of T.N., (2018) 5 SCC 
549 : (2018) 2 SCC (Cri) 793] , in the following terms, 
by referring to the three-Judge Bench decision in State 
of Rajasthan v. Kalki [State of Rajasthan v. Kalki, (1981) 
2 SCC 752 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 593] : (Ganapathi case 
[Ganapathi v. State of T.N., (2018) 5 SCC 549 : (2018) 2 
SCC (Cri) 793] , SCC p. 555, para 14)
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
711
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
“14. “Related” is not equivalent to “interested”. A 
witness may be called “interested” only when he or 
she derives some benefit from the result of a litigation; 
in the decree in a civil case, or in seeing an accused 
person punished. A witness who is a natural one and 
is the only possible eyewitness in the circumstances 
of a case cannot be said to be “interested”.”
14. In criminal cases, it is often the case that the offence 
is witnessed by a close relative of the victim, whose 
presence on the scene of the offence would be natural. 
The evidence of such a witness cannot automatically be 
discarded by labelling the witness as interested. Indeed, 
one of the earliest statements with respect to interested 
witnesses in criminal cases was made by this Court in 
Dalip Singh v. State of Punjab [Dalip Singh v. State of 
Punjab, (1953) 2 SCC 36 : 1954 SCR 145 : AIR 1953 SC 
364 : 1953 Cri LJ 1465] , wherein this Court observed: 
(AIR p. 366, para 26)
“26. A witness is normally to be considered 
independent unless he or she springs from sources 
which are likely to be tainted and that usually means 
unless the witness has cause, such as enmity against 
the accused, to wish to implicate him falsely. Ordinarily 
a close relative would be the last to screen the real 
culprit and falsely implicate an innocent person.”
15. In case of a related witness, the Court may not treat his 
or her testimony as inherently tainted, and needs to ensure 
only that the evidence is inherently reliable, probable, 
cogent and consistent. We may refer to the observations 
of this Court in Jayabalan v. State (UT of Pondicherry) 
[Jayabalan v. State (UT of Pondicherry), (2010) 1 SCC 
199 : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 966] : (SCC p. 213, para 23)
“23. We are of the considered view that in cases where 
the court is called upon to deal with the evidence of 
the interested witnesses, the approach of the court, 
while appreciating the evidence of such witnesses 
must not be pedantic. The court must be cautious 
712
Supreme Court Reports
in appreciating and accepting the evidence given by 
the interested witnesses but the court must not be 
suspicious of such evidence. The primary endeavour 
of the court must be to look for consistency. The 
evidence of a witness cannot be ignored or thrown 
out solely because it comes from the mouth of a 
person who is closely related to the victim.”
81.	 As also observed by the High Court, we do not see any reason 
why the mother of the victim should falsely implicate the appellants 
without any rhyme or reason more so when apparently there was no 
previous animosity of the mother Lata Bai with any of the appellants.
Lata Bai, PW-10 is certainly not an interested witness even though 
she was related to the victim and her testimony cannot be impeached 
on this ground.
82.	 We must also remember that, while recording the testimony of Lata 
Bai PW-10, the trial court noted the demeanour of the witness. Section 
280 of the CrPC enjoins upon the Judge to record such remarks as 
he thinks material respecting the demeanour of the witness while 
under examination since the demeanour can provide insights into 
the witness’s truthfulness and reliability, which are critical for the 
court’s assessment of the evidence presented, which ought not be 
ignored by the Appellate Court. 
It was noted by the trial court in para 2 of her examination-in-chief, 
that the witness was crying while deposing that there were several 
injuries on her son’s body and that he sustained grievous injuries 
over the right auricle and was bleeding. She stated that she then 
carried him on her lap with the help of the police and took him to 
the hospital in a rickshaw.
83.	 The trial court after recording the testimony of the PW-10 and on 
consideration of the same found her evidence trustworthy and credible. 
We see no reason to question the assessment about the credibility of 
the witness by the Trial Court which had the advantage of seeing and 
hearing above the witness and all other witnesses. Nothing has been 
brought to our notice of any serious illegality or breach of fundamental 
law so as to warrant taking a different view of the evidence of PW-10.
In this regard we may keep in mind the valuable observations made 
by this Court in Jagdish Singh v. Madhuri Devi, (2008) 10 SCC 
497 in the following words:
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
713
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
“28. At the same time, however, the appellate court is 
expected, nay bound, to bear in mind a finding recorded 
by the trial court on oral evidence. It should not forget that 
the trial court had an advantage and opportunity of seeing 
the demeanour of witnesses and, hence, the trial court’s 
conclusions should not normally be disturbed. No doubt, 
the appellate court possesses the same powers as that of 
the original court, but they have to be exercised with proper 
care, caution and circumspection. When a finding of fact 
has been recorded by the trial court mainly on appreciation 
of oral evidence, it should not be lightly disturbed unless 
the approach of the trial court in appraisal of evidence is 
erroneous, contrary to well-established principles of law 
or unreasonable.
29. …………………………………..
30. In Sara Veeraswami v. Talluri Narayya [(1947-48) 75 
IA 252 : AIR 1949 PC 32] the Judicial Committee of the 
Privy Council, after referring to relevant decisions on the 
point, stated [ Quoting from Watt v. Thomas, (1947) 1 All 
ER 582, pp. 583 H-584 A.] : (IA p. 255)
“… but if the evidence as a whole can reasonably 
be regarded as justifying the conclusion arrived at 
at the trial, and especially if that conclusion has 
been arrived at on conflicting testimony by a tribunal 
which saw and heard the witnesses, the appellate 
court will bear in mind that it has not enjoyed this 
opportunity and that the view of the trial Judge as 
to where credibility lies is entitled to great weight. 
This is not to say that the Judge of first instance can 
be treated as infallible in determining which side is 
telling the truth or is refraining from exaggeration. 
Like other tribunals, he may go wrong on a question 
of fact, but it is a cogent circumstance that a Judge 
of first instance, when estimating the value of verbal 
testimony, has the advantage (which is denied to 
courts of appeal) of having the witnesses before him 
and observing the manner in which their evidence 
is given.”
714
Supreme Court Reports
84.	 In view of the above, we are of the opinion that even if there are 
certain embellishments and improvements and contradictions which 
are of minor nature, the evidence of PW-10 on the whole does 
appear to be consistent and we do not see any cogent reason to 
disbelieve her claim that she had witnessed the incident. Thus, we 
are of the opinion that there appears to be no patent illegality in the 
view taken by the trial court and the High Court.
85.	 We also hold that just because the Chintaram, father of the Appellants 
was acquitted will not warrant their acquittal as there is sufficient and 
cogent material evidence against them to prove the case beyond 
reasonable doubt whereas the case against the acquitted Chintaram 
is doubtful.
Since there is no appeal against the acquittal of the father, we do 
not wish to go into the subsequent acquittal of Chintaram.
The High Court had noted that, on close scrutiny of the evidence on 
record, there is no clinching evidence of the said Chintaram taking 
part in the assault and his name does not figure in the Ex-P/1 which 
was prepared soon after the incident by the police for referring the 
injured to the Community Hospital, Tilda and also the evidence of 
PW-10 that she did not mention his presence in the police station 
while naming the appellants. We are of the opinion that the role of 
Chintaram does not come out clearly as to fasten criminal liability 
on him along with the appellants. Thus, the present two appellants 
cannot be placed at par with the case of the acquitted accused, 
Chintaram.
86.	 As regards applicability of the case of State of Punjab vs. Sucha 
Singh (supra) is concerned wherein this court found the inaction of 
the father to come to the rescue of the victim son is concerned, it 
is to be noted that, unlike in the said case, the evidence which has 
emerged is that the father PW-5 came to the scene after the assailants 
appellants had fled. Hence, the question of his intervening does not 
arise. If the said case of Sucha Singh (supra) is to be applicable 
as contended by the appellant, it would mean that the father, PW-5 
would have witnessed which goes against their own case. 
As far as the mother PW-10 is concerned, on seeing the assault she 
ran inside to wake up her husband and when they came out, the 
assailants had fled. It cannot be considered to be highly unnatural 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
715
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
for a woman not rushing to intervene and instead seek the help of 
a male member (her husband) when there were two persons with 
deadly weapons assaulting her.
87.	 In conclusion, we are of the view that, the evidence of the sole eye 
witness, a hapless rustic illiterate woman visited with the vicissitude 
and tragedy of her son being fatally assaulted by co-villagers before 
her own eyes, has withstood intensive cross examination and judicial 
scrutiny. She has answered the questions put to her during her cross 
examination with spontaneity without any jitteriness and her response 
was natural and not elusive and prevaricating, which all are signs 
of truthfulness of the witness. We, therefore, have no hesitation to 
hold that her testimony is trustworthy and reliable. Her evidence 
finds corroboration from the admissible part of the evidence of the 
complainant, and her husband even though they had turned hostile, 
and the medical evidence, evidence of the Investigating Officer and 
other official witnesses. 
88.	 In the present case, we are satisfied that in the facts and circumstances 
as evident from the records, the Prosecution has been able to establish 
beyond reasonable doubt that the appellants were responsible for 
the death of the deceased, Suraj for which they were convicted by 
the trial court under Section 302 of the IPC.
89.	 We do not see any glaring illegality or perversity in the findings arrived 
at the trial court and the High Court causing any grave miscarriage 
of justice to the appellants. 
90.	 However, in spite of our finding that the appellants had assaulted the 
deceased with deadly weapons causing the death of the deceased, 
we have noted that the death of the deceased was not instantaneous. 
He survived the brutal attack for a few days and later succumbed to 
his injuries. The deceased was assaulted in the morning of 23.9.2001 
and died on the night of 25.9.2001.
The doctor, Dr. G. R. Agarwal, PW-1, opined that the injuries no. (i), 
(vi), (viii) and (ix) might be caused by the iron pipe and these were 
not described as grievous. On the other hand, the other injuries no. 
(ii), (iii), (iv), (v) and (vii) were described as grievous head injuries 
which might be caused by the axe. The deceased later succumbed 
because of the accumulated effect of these head injuries as testified 
by PW-13, Dr. Arvind Neralwar who conducted the post mortem 
716
Supreme Court Reports
examination of the body of the deceased. According to him the 
cause of death was coma due to head injuries. If we closely examine 
these injuries, it is seen that though the injuries on the head were 
identified as grievous, these are shown as skin deep injuries and 
no particular injury was identified as being the fatal one. Since the 
cause of death is attributed to coma because of the head injuries 
and it was opined that the injuries are sufficient in ordinary course 
of nature to cause death, it appears that it is the cumulative effect 
of these head injuries. 
What is also observable is that he did not succumb to the injuries 
immediately and he died on the third day of the incident. 
It is also noticeable that the circumstances under which the assault took 
place and the reason for causing the injuries by the appellants and the 
motive behind their assault has not come out clearly. Even the sole 
eye witness, Lata Bai (PW-10), the mother of the deceased testified 
that her son was having visiting terms with the accused persons as 
they were residing in the same locality and she cannot tell why the 
quarrel occurred suddenly. It has not been established clearly that it 
was premeditated and the assault was preplanned with the intention 
to kill the deceased. Any prior enmity between the appellants and the 
deceased has not been established. Thus, the motive for committing 
the crime has not been clearly established and proved.
91.	 However, it is established beyond reasonable doubt that the appellants 
had caused the death of the deceased fully knowing that the bodily 
injuries caused by the appellants were likely to cause death as the 
appellants were armed with deadly weapons, we are inclined to 
convert the conviction of the appellants from Section 302 IPC to 
Part I of Section 304 IPC. Accordingly, we convict the appellants 
under Part I of Section 304 IPC.
92.	 Having convicted the appellants under Part I of Section 304 IPC, 
the next consideration is the quantum of punishment that may be 
imposed on them.
93.	 Under Part I of Section 304 IPC, whoever commits culpable homicide 
not amounting to murder shall be punished with imprisonment for life, 
or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the 
death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of 
causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
717
Goverdhan & Anr. v. State of Chhattisgarh 
As per the records, the appellants have already undergone 10 years 3 
months of incarceration during the trial and pendency of the appeals 
before the High Court and this Court.
This Court by an order dated 06.01.2012 had enlarged the appellants 
on bail during the pendency of this appeal and the appeal has 
remained pending before this Court since 2011.
94.	 Under the facts and circumstances discussed above, we are of 
the view that interest of justice will be served if the appellants are 
sentenced to the period already undergone by them and impose 
a fine of Rs.50,000/- each on the appellants, which shall be paid 
to the family of the deceased through his mother, namely Lata Bai 
(PW-10), failing which the appellants will undergo additional 6 (six) 
months simple imprisonment. In the event of the appellants paying 
the amount, as ordered above, the bail bonds shall stand discharged. 
In the event of non-payment, the bail bonds shall stand discharged 
after undergoing the default sentence.
95.	 For the reasons discussed above, the appeal is partly allowed as 
above.
Result of the case: Appeal partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Bibhuti Bhushan Bose