[2025] 7 S.C.R. 407 : 2025 INSC 800
Vaibhav 
v. 
The State of Maharashtra
(Criminal Appeal No. 1643 of 2012)
04 June 2025
[B.V. Nagarathna and Satish Chandra Sharma,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
In a case based on circumstantial evidence where there were 
missing links in the chain of circumstances, whether the finding of 
the High Court regarding the conviction of the appellant for offences 
u/ss.302, 201 r/w s.34, Penal Code, 1860 and s.5 r/w s.25(1)(a), 
Arms Act, 1959 was sustainable in light of the evidence on record.
Headnotes†
Circumstantial evidence – Missing links in the chain of 
circumstances – Accidental gunshot injury – Appellant was 
convicted u/ss.302, 201 r/w s.34, Penal Code, 1860 and s.5 
r/w 25(1)(a), Arms Act, 1959 for the murder of his friend – 
Defence of the appellant that the deceased had accidentally 
shot himself with the pistol belonging to the appellant’s father: 
Held: The present is a case of an accidental gunshot injury and the 
possibility of a homicidal death is very weak in the present case – 
Imprints on the pistol had not been matched with the appellant 
and therefore, it cannot be concluded that the trigger was pulled 
by the appellant – Courts below failed to examine whether the 
defence of the appellant that the deceased on finding the service 
pistol of the appellant’s father, got curious, picked it up, started 
looking into it with one eye from a close distance and accidentally 
pressed the trigger, was a probable defence or not – The theory 
put across by the appellant is fairly probable and is supported by 
medical evidence including the examination of the bullet injury and 
trajectory – Contrarily, the conclusion drawn by the Courts below 
is not supported by medical evidence and is not consistent with 
the bullet injury and trajectory – The subsequent conduct of the 
appellant of removing the dead body and concealment of articles 
was a natural result of fear of his father and was consistent with the 
* Author
408
Supreme Court Reports
theory of accidental death – A young boy in first year of college, with 
no criminal background and with no motive in sight, would certainly 
have become scared on seeing that his friend has accidentally shot 
himself in the living room of his house with the pistol belonging to 
his father – In a case purely based on circumstantial evidence, the 
chain of circumstances must be complete and consistent with the 
conclusion of guilt only and must not support a contrary finding – 
Circumstantial evidence on record is not consistent and leaves a 
reasonable possibility of an alternate outcome of innocence of the 
appellant – High Court erred in arriving at the finding of guilt and 
upholding the judgment of Trial Court – Appellant acquitted for 
offences u/s.302, IPC and s.5 r/w s.25(1)(a), Arms Act – However, 
conviction u/s.201, IPC is sustained and he is sentenced for the 
period already undergone. [Paras 18, 20, 22, 26, 27, 29]
Evidence Act, 1872 – s.8 – Subsequent conduct – Case 
based on circumstantial Evidence – Evidentiary burden – To 
be discharged by the prosecution vis-à-vis the accused – 
Appellant was convicted for the murder of his friend – Defence 
of the appellant that the deceased had accidentally shot 
himself in the living room of the appellant’s house with the 
pistol belonging to appellant’s father – Courts below relied on 
subsequent conduct of the appellant like removal of the dead 
body, concealment of articles and drew adverse inference:
Held: Primary burden is on the prosecution and it is only if the 
prosecution succeeds in discharging its burden beyond reasonable 
doubt that the burden shifts upon the accused to explain the 
evidence against him or to present a defence – Prosecution’s 
version suffered from inherent inconsistencies and doubts, and 
thus, the inability of the appellant to explain certain circumstances 
could not be made the basis to relieve the prosecution from 
discharging its primary burden – Undoubtedly, in a case based on 
circumstantial evidence, facts indicating subsequent conduct are 
relevant facts u/s.8, Evidence Act – Equally, the inconsistencies 
in the version of the appellant are also relevant however, the 
occasion to examine the version/defence of the appellant could 
have arisen only if the prosecution had succeeded in discharging 
its primary burden beyond reasonable doubt – The inability of an 
accused to offer plausible explanation on certain aspects would 
not automatically absolve the prosecution of its evidentiary burden, 
which must be discharged first and beyond doubt – Evidence Act, 
1872 – s.8. [Para 21]
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
409
Vaibhav v. The State of Maharashtra
Gunshot cases – Nature of death whether suicidal, accidental 
or homicidal not ascertainable from direct evidence – Factors 
to be examined by the Court, stated. [Para 19]
Circumstantial evidence – Motive, relevance of – Accidental 
gunshot injury – Absence of motive – Appellant was convicted 
for the murder of his friend – Defence of the appellant that the 
deceased had accidentally shot himself in the living room of 
the appellant’s house with the pistol belonging to appellant’s 
father:
Held: In a case based on circumstantial evidence, motive is 
relevant – However, it is not conclusive of the matter – But a 
complete absence of motive may weigh in favour of the accused – 
Testimonies of prosecution witnesses revealed that the appellant 
and the deceased were friends and there was no ill-will between 
them – Even the father of the deceased testified to that effect – 
In cases purely based on circumstantial evidence, the absence 
of motive could raise serious questions and might even render 
the chain of evidence as doubtful because the presence of 
motive explains the circumstantial evidence – For instance, in 
the facts of the present case, any evidence of enmity between 
the appellant and the deceased would have made suspicious 
the act of the appellant of taking the deceased to his home 
prior to his death – However, since the evidence suggests that 
they were friends, the fact that the appellant brought him home 
could not be termed as per-se incriminating – Therefore, motive 
explains the circumstances on record and enables the Court to 
draw better inference in a case based on circumstantial evidence. 
[Paras 23, 25]
Case Law Cited
Anwar Ali & Anr. v. State of Himachal Pradesh [2020] 9 SCR 878 : 
(2020) 10 SCC 166; Shivaji Chintappa Patil v. State of Maharashtra 
[2021] 2 SCR 617 : (2021) 5 SCC 626; Nandu Singh v. State of 
Madhya Pradesh (now Chhattisgarh), Criminal Appeal No. 285 
of 2022 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Arms Act, 1959; Evidence Act, 1872.
410
Supreme Court Reports
List of Keywords
Accidental gunshot injury; Accidental death; Circumstantial 
evidence; Bullet injury and trajectory; Service pistol; Homicidal 
death; Removal of the dead body; Concealment of articles; Burden 
beyond reasonable doubt; Preponderance of probabilities; Absence 
of motive; Subsequent conduct; Chain of evidence; Inconsistencies 
in the chain of circumstances; Cleaning up the crime scene; 
Disappearance of evidence; Mere suspicion, no matter how grave, 
cannot take the place of proof; No direct evidence; Alternate 
outcome; Innocence.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1643 of 2012
From the Judgment and Order dated 13.06.2012 of the High Court 
of Bombay at Nagpur in CRLA No. 57 of 2012
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Vipin Sanghi, Sr. Adv., Satyajit A. Desai, Siddharth Gautam, Ananya 
Thapliyal, Abhinav K. Mutyalwar, Sachin Singh, Ms. Anagha S. 
Desai.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Bharat Bagla, 
Sourav Singh, Aditya Krishna, Adarsh Dubey.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Satish Chandra Sharma, J.
1.	
This is a tale of two friends, Vaibhav and Mangesh, who were 
studying at Bagla Homeopathy Medical College, Arvat Chandrapur, 
Maharashtra. They were students of first year and often used to 
commute together on their two-wheelers. On the fateful day of 
16.09.2010, both friends left the college together on the scooter 
belonging to Mangesh, had tea at the tea stall of PW-3 and arrived 
at Vaibhav’s house in the afternoon. When Mangesh’s father/PW-1 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
411
Vaibhav v. The State of Maharashtra
discovered late in the evening that his son had not reached home, 
he tried to find out and eventually lodged a missing report. The 
next day, on 17.09.2010, the dead body of Mangesh was found and 
accordingly, the present criminal case came to be registered against 
unknown persons. 
2.	
Investigation commenced and a supplementary statement of 
PW-1 was recorded wherein he raised suspicion against Vaibhav, 
Mangesh’s friend, classmate, scooter partner and appellant before 
us in the present appeal. Upon investigation, the police prepared 
the chargesheet wherein the appellant was alleged to have caused 
death of deceased Mangesh by shooting him by the gun belonging 
to the appellant’s father/PW-12. 
3.	
Upon trial, the Trial Court found that the appellant had killed Mangesh 
using the service gun belonging to his father when he came to 
drop him after college. Thereafter, the appellant called his friends 
Vishal and Akash (juvenile at the time of incident) for helping him 
in the disposal of the dead body. The appellant was found guilty for 
the commission of the offences under Sections 302, 201 read with 
Section 34 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred as “IPC” 
for brevity) and Section 5 read with 25(1)(a) of Arms Act, 1959. His 
friend Vishal was also found guilty for the commission of the offence 
under Section 201 read with Section 34 of IPC. Both the convicts 
had preferred separate appeals before the Bombay High Court and 
both the appeals came to be disposed of by the impugned judgment, 
wherein the conviction of the appellant was upheld and Vishal was 
acquitted for want of evidence. The present appeal assails the said 
impugned judgment dated 13.06.2012 passed in Criminal Appeal 
No. 57/2012.
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT
4.	
While upholding the conviction of the appellant, the High Court 
appreciated the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses and 
acknowledged that the case is based on circumstantial evidence as 
no direct evidence of the alleged act could be found. After examining 
the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses, the High Court observed 
that the material against the accused could be summed up as follows:
“17. The material evidence adduced by the prosecution 
an admitted by the defence which are necessary for the 
decision of this appeal are enumerated thus:-
412
Supreme Court Reports
(a) PW12 Khushal Tijare, father of the deceased, is a 
Police Officer to whom the 9mm pistol was entrusted 
along with 30 rounds.
(b) The accused and the deceased were known to each 
other.
(c) On 16.9.2010, PW12 Khushalrao had kept the pistol 
under the mattress in his bedroom.
(d) A1 and the deceased had been to the house of A1. 
On 16.9.2010 after 3 p.m. nobody was at home.
(e) A1 called upon his father telephonically and demanded 
the keys of the rear door which leads to the abandoned 
quarter.
(f) PW12 informed A1 that the keys were behind the wall.
(g) On 16.9.2010, the deceased was lastly seen in the 
company of the accused as admitted by him.
(h) On 16.9.2010 after 8 p.m., PW1 was searching for his 
son and in the course of searching visited the house of 
A1 to inquire about Mangesh and that A1 informed PW1 
that he had lastly seen Mangesh at 4 p.m.
(i) A1 visited the house of PW1 at 10 p.m. on 16.9.2010 and 
inquired about Mangesh. He returned home. His parents 
were at home. However, he did not disclose anything.
(j) On 17.9.2010, A1 visited the house of PW1 i.e. father 
of Mangesh at 9 a.m. Thereafter he revisited the house 
of PW1 with four friends and assured PW1 that they 
would search for Mangesh and made PW1 believe that 
Mangesh was alive.
(k) After the dead body was noticed in the courtyard 
behind the residential house of A1 and was being removed 
from the spot, A1 accompanied the Police still pretending 
ignorance about cause of death of Mangesh.
(l) The admission of A1 that his acquaintance with the 
deceased was just one month prior to the incident.
(m) The admission of A1 as a defence witness that when 
he went to change his clothes in his room, Mangesh was 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
413
Vaibhav v. The State of Maharashtra
sitting on the bed in the living room, A1 heard the noise of 
firearm and came in the living room and found Mangesh 
lying on the ground with the pistol in his hand and that 
pistol was of his father.
(n) The admission of defence witness A1 that as soon as 
he saw Mangesh lying on the ground with the pistol, his 
first reaction was that he took the pistol and kept under 
the mattress of the bed i.e. the place where it was left by 
his father. Yet he has stated that he had no knowledge 
as to where his father had left the pistol. This contention 
cannot be believed.
(o) The admission of A1 that out of fear he removed the 
dead body from the living room and took it to the courtyard 
on the rear side of his house, that he cleaned the floor 
due to fear.
(p) The admission of A1 that when he had gone to change 
his clothes, Mangesh had not left the living room. Therefore, 
Mangesh had no access to the bed room and location of 
the pistol from beneath the mattress within a span of few 
minutes.
(q) The fact that although there was memorandum of 
recovery of clothes and it was not followed by a seizure, 
coupled with the statement of A1 that he had given it to 
the Police but they said that it was not required. The act of 
the accused disposing the cartridge at a particular place, 
showing the place to the Police, attempting to search the 
bullet at that place and yet not finding it.
(r) The explanation of PW12 below Exh.83 which is denied 
in the cross-examination of PW12.
(s) The sanction order issued by the District Magistrate 
for prosecuting the accused showing that the weapon of 
assault was used in the offence.”
5.	
The High Court laid great emphasis on the fact that after the death 
of Mangesh, the appellant had tried to stifle the investigation by 
removing evidence. It observed thus: 
414
Supreme Court Reports
“20. The fact that the accused attempted to stifle the 
investigation is relevant under Section 8 of the Indian 
Evidence Act. The fact of fear as deposed by A1, accepted 
by the accused is relevant.”
6.	
On a careful perusal of the impugned judgment, it could be seen that 
the High Court has heavily relied upon Section 8 of the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872 (hereinafter referred as “Evidence Act”) to draw inferences 
from the subsequent conduct of the appellant, especially removal of 
the dead body, concealment of clothes, visits by the accused to the 
residence of PW-1 pretending to enquire about the deceased etc. 
As regards the causal link between the appellant and the alleged 
act, the High Court observed that the link was established as the 9 
mm pistol belonging to the father of the appellant had caused the 
death of the appellant. The following para is indicative of the same:
“23. …In the present case, the accused has himself 
admitted the weapon to be the service pistol of his father 
and that it was in the hand of deceased when he first 
saw him. The prosecution has led cogent and convincing 
evidence to prove that Mangesh had sustained the bullet 
injury with the same 9mm pistol. There is no ambiguity of 
the identity or description of weapon. The link evidence 
between the crime and the accused is established beyond 
reasonable doubt and by the admission of the accused 
himself and his father.”
7.	
The appellant had taken two primary defenses before the High 
Court – impossibility of homicidal death in light of the trajectory of the 
bullet and report of PW-9 which pointed towards accidental death. 
Both the contentions were turned down in the impugned judgment 
assigning different reasons. While rejecting the former contention, 
the High Court again adverted to the subsequent conduct of the 
appellant and observed thus:
“22. The learned counsel for the accused also pleaded that 
it appears from the evidence that the bullet was fired from 
a close range of 15cm would show that it is accidental. He 
has argued that there was no blackening around the eye. 
The direction in which the bullet had travelled through the 
eye to the occipital region would show that it is a case 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
415
Vaibhav v. The State of Maharashtra
of accidental firing. The counsel has further argued that 
falsity of defence or giving a false explanation does not 
provide an additional link and cannot be made a ground 
for conviction. In the present case, it is not the falsity of 
defence which is being considered and, therefore, we 
have referred to Section 8 of the Indian Evidence Act. 
The accused had prepared a good ground and given false 
explanation or rather made up a new story at the threshold 
i.e. even prior to investigation, at the time of investigation 
and, therefore, his conduct indicates the act of guilty mind.”
8.	
On the second aspect, the High Court observed that it was not 
obligatory for PW-9 to have given her opinion regarding the cause of 
death, as the cause of death was well known and was “admitted by 
the accused on oath”. The relevant part of the impugned judgment 
reads thus:
“28. The learned counsel has heavily relied upon the 
deposition of PW9 wherein it is stated that she cannot 
say as to whether the death is accidental or homicidal. We 
have already discussed that it is not obligatory on the part 
of the Doctor to give the cause of death when the cause 
is known and is established by the cogent and convincing 
evidence and moreover admitted by the accused on oath.”
THE CHALLENGE
9.	
Taking exception to the impugned judgment, Ld. Counsel on behalf of 
the appellant submits that the High Court did not examine the grounds 
taken by the appellant. It is submitted that as per the evidence of 
PW-9, the trajectory of the bullet was such that it had exited from 
the downward portion of the skull of the deceased and then hit the 
ventilator above the door. It is submitted that such a trajectory was 
only possible in case of a suicidal death and not homicidal. It is 
further submitted that the courts below have erred in not appreciating 
the testimony of PW-9, who had clearly deposed that she could not 
ascertain the cause of death and could not tell with certainty whether 
the death was suicidal or homicidal. 
10.	 Relying upon medical jurisprudence, it is further submitted that in 
cases of accidental injuries by fire arm, bullet is hit from a close 
416
Supreme Court Reports
distance. Further, in such cases, the injury is often singular. It is 
submitted that in the present case, both the elements of accidental 
death are present and the Courts below erred in not appreciating so. 
11.	 As regards the conduct of the appellant after the incident, it is 
submitted that the appellant has categorically deposed that the 
death of Mangesh was caused by his father’s pistol at his residence. 
He has also deposed that as he heard the gunshot, he came out 
and saw the dead body of Mangesh lying in pool of blood. He got 
scared of his father and tried to clean up the scene and in doing so, 
he removed the dead body of the deceased and cleaned the blood 
by using phenyl. It is further submitted that there was no motive 
for the appellant to have caused the death of Mangesh and the 
relationship between the appellant and the deceased was friendly. 
To buttress this submission, it is submitted that in a case based on 
circumstantial evidence, absence of motive is a crucial fact which 
renders the prosecution case doubtful. 
12.	 It is further submitted that the Courts below had placed undue burden 
upon the appellant to offer explanation for certain circumstances and 
his subsequent conduct. It is contended that it was for the prosecution 
to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and mere inability of the 
appellant to explain certain aspects could not be read against him to 
arrive at a finding of guilt. Lastly, it is submitted that in a case based 
on circumstantial evidence, if two views are possible, the Court must 
lean in favour of the view favourable to the accused. 
DISCUSSION
13.	 We have carefully considered the grounds of appeal, respective 
submissions advanced at Bar and have heard both sides at length. 
We may now consider the principal issue whether the finding of the 
High Court regarding the conviction of the appellant is sustainable 
in light of the evidence on record. 
14.	 In the factual matrix of the present case, it could be observed at the 
outset that certain facts stand duly admitted. We may first consider 
such facts. The cause of death of the deceased is undisputed, as it is 
admitted that the deceased was shot by the service pistol belonging to 
PW-12, the father of the appellant. Although, the investigating officer 
did not obtain any ballistic report to ascertain the nexus between 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
417
Vaibhav v. The State of Maharashtra
the bullet injury and the service pistol of PW-12, however, it could 
be seen from the record that the nexus has not been questioned by 
the defence. In fact, both the appellant and PW-12 have admitted 
that the bullet was shot from the pistol of PW-12 which was lying in 
the house. Furthermore, PW-11 has also confirmed that when the 
service pistol was re-deposited by PW-12, one bullet was missing 
from the sanctioned number of bullets. 
15.	 Going further, it is also admitted that the appellant had indeed 
removed the dead body of the deceased and had cleaned up the 
scene of crime. It is also a matter of record that the discoveries 
made under Section 27 of Evidence Act were not challenged by 
the appellant as the appellant had admitted that various articles 
belonging to himself and the deceased, and connected with the 
alleged incident, were discovered in furtherance of his disclosures. 
All these aspects, however, assume greater relevance for the offence 
under Section 201 IPC. Insofar as the offences under Section 302 
IPC and Section 25 of Arms Act are concerned, the prosecution 
case leaves us wanting for answers. No doubt, the deceased was 
shot by the pistol belonging to the father of the appellant and in the 
house of the appellant, but the pertinent question that craves for an 
answer is – who pulled the trigger? Despite two rounds of litigation, 
the question is yet to find an answer.
16.	 In a case based on circumstantial evidence, answers to such questions 
are not found on the face of the record. Rather, the truth is found 
concealed in the layers of incriminating and exonerating facts, and 
the Court is required to arrive at a judicial finding on the basis of the 
best possible inference which could be drawn from a comprehensive 
analysis of the chain of circumstances in a case. As per the record 
and the analysis carried out by the Courts below, the circumstances 
weighing against the accused could briefly be summarized as:
i.	
The presence of deceased at the house of the appellant prior 
to and at the time of incident;
ii.	
Admitted removal of dead body of the deceased by the appellant;
iii.	
Admitted removal, concealment and subsequent discovery of 
various articles as per the disclosure made by the appellant;
iv.	
Fatal gunshot by the pistol lying in the house of the appellant;
418
Supreme Court Reports
v.	
Subsequent conduct of the appellant in trying to show concern 
to the father of the deceased despite knowing about the death;
vi.	
Failure of the appellant to explain certain circumstances such as 
the manner in which the pistol fell in the hands of the deceased, 
how was it re-concealed etc. 
17.	 Having observed the incriminating circumstances, we may now 
advert to the circumstances which leave missing links in the chain 
of the prosecution. Such instances include the doubt expressed by 
PW-9 regarding the nature of death, trajectory of bullet, possibility 
of accidental injury etc. The case of the appellant is that a proper 
appreciation of the exonerating circumstances would make the 
version of the prosecution highly improbable and doubtful. We may 
now examine the same by first considering the version of PW-9. 
Notably, PW-9 has deposed regarding the trajectory of the bullet as it 
entered and exited the skull of the deceased. PW-9 had also annexed 
a diagram of the trajectory, which revealed that the bullet entered 
through the eye of the deceased and exited from the lower part of 
the skull from the back. It would have been possible to reconcile this 
trajectory with the version of homicidal death. However, questions 
arise when the journey of the bullet is analyzed after it exited from 
the lower part of the skull. For, after taking an exit from the lower 
skull, the bullet hit against a ventilator which was installed above the 
door of the living room. Admittedly, the ventilator was installed at a 
height significantly higher than the height of the deceased, thereby 
meaning that the bullet travelled upwards after it left the skull of the 
deceased. The version of the prosecution is simply that the appellant 
shot the deceased in the eye and there has been no effort to prove 
the directions of entry or exit or to explain the inward or outward 
journey of the bullet. The prosecution version remains acceptable 
only till the point of entry of the bullet through the eye, but it starts 
becoming cloudy when the upward trajectory of the bullet is analyzed 
further, as discussed above. 
18.	 In usual course of things, such trajectory of the bullet could have 
been possible only if the deceased was sitting and looking downwards 
towards the barrel of the pistol from a close distance. It was only 
then that the bullet could have hit the ventilator despite exiting from 
the lower part of the skull. In fact, this is precisely the defence of the 
appellant - that the deceased, on finding the service pistol of PW-12, 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
419
Vaibhav v. The State of Maharashtra
got curious, picked it up, started looking into it with one eye from a 
close distance and accidentally pressed the trigger. The probability 
of the version put across by the appellant is on the higher side as 
compared to the version put across by the prosecution, which simply 
does not give any explanation for the trajectory of the bullet. 
19.	 In gunshot cases wherein the nature of death – suicidal, accidental 
or homicidal – is not ascertainable from direct evidence, multiple 
factors are taken into account for arriving at a conclusion. Such 
factors include, but are not limited to, the point of entrance, the size 
of wound, direction of wound, position of wound, possible distance 
of gunshot, number of wounds, position of weapon, trajectory of 
bullet after entering into the human body, position of exit wound 
(if bullet has exited), direction of exit wound, direction of the bullet 
after exit, distance travelled by the bullet after exit, nature of final 
impact on surface (if any) etc. All such factors, to the extent of their 
applicability to the facts of the case, need to be examined by the 
Court before arriving at a judicial finding of fact. Undoubtedly, no 
such analysis could be found in the impugned judgment. The High 
Court merely brushed aside the defence of the appellant by referring 
to the subsequent conduct of the appellant and by raising adverse 
inference on that basis. 
20.	 Similarly, the inconclusive opinion of PW-9 regarding the death being 
homicidal or suicidal/accidental was also a relevant fact. No doubt, 
PW-9 was not bound to give a conclusive opinion as observed by 
the High Court, however, it ought to have been examined whether 
the failure to do so had a bearing on the judicial determination of 
the real cause of death. The nature of death ought to have been 
examined in light of the surrounding circumstances discussed 
above, which weigh against the possibility of a homicidal death. The 
appellant has also placed reliance on medical jurisprudence regarding 
the nature of injuries in accidental or suicidal gunshot cases. More 
often than not, in accidental gunshot cases, the injury is found to 
be singular and inflicted from a close range. The present case ticks 
the boxes of an accidental gunshot injury, both in theory and in fact. 
Contrarily, the aforesaid discussion indicates that the possibility of 
a homicidal death is very weak in the present case. It must also be 
kept in mind that the imprints on the pistol have not been matched 
with the appellant and therefore, no direct nexus exists to conclude 
420
Supreme Court Reports
that the trigger was pulled by the appellant. On this aspect as well, 
we may note with dismay that the High Court rejected the defence 
of the appellant by simply observing that the homicidal death of the 
deceased was ‘admitted’ by the appellant on oath. There is no such 
admission qua the nature of death. Contrarily, the appellant had 
deposed on oath that the death was ‘accidental’, a version that he 
has carried consistently up to this Court.
21.	 Having said so, we may now examine what weighed with the High 
Court to arrive at the finding of guilt of the appellant. On a careful 
reading of the impugned judgment, one would unmistakably note that 
the subsequent conduct of the appellant in indulging in destruction 
of evidence weighed heavily against him in the mind of the Court. 
The inability of the appellant to explain certain aspects also weighed 
against him. Undoubtedly, in a case based on circumstantial evidence, 
facts indicating subsequent conduct are relevant facts under Section 
8 of the Evidence Act. Equally, the inconsistencies in the version of 
the appellant are also relevant. However, the occasion to examine 
the version/defence of the appellant could have arisen only if the 
prosecution had succeeded in discharging its primary burden beyond 
reasonable doubt. In criminal jurisprudence, it is a time-tested 
proposition that the primary burden falls upon the shoulders of the 
prosecution and it is only if the prosecution succeeds in discharging 
its burden beyond reasonable doubt that the burden shifts upon 
the accused to explain the evidence against him or to present a 
defence. In the present case, the version of the prosecution suffers 
from inherent inconsistencies and doubts, as discussed above, and 
in such a scenario, the inability of the appellant to explain certain 
circumstances could not be made the basis to relieve the prosecution 
from discharging its primary burden. The High Court fell in a grave 
error in doing so, as it placed greater reliance on the loopholes in 
the appellant’s version without first determining whether the chain of 
circumstances sought to be proved by the prosecution was complete 
or not. Pertinently, the inability of an accused to offer plausible 
explanation on certain aspects would not automatically absolve the 
prosecution of its evidentiary burden, which must be discharged first 
and beyond doubt. 
22.	 In law, there is a significant difference in the evidentiary burden 
to be discharged by the prosecution and the accused. Whereas, 
the former is expected to discharge its burden beyond reasonable 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
421
Vaibhav v. The State of Maharashtra
doubt, the latter is only required to prove a defence on the anvil of 
preponderance of probabilities. If the accused leads defence evidence 
in the course of a criminal trial, the same ought to be tested as 
probable or improbable in the facts and circumstances of the case. 
The present case, we are afraid, reveals that the defence taken by 
the accused since the beginning of the case was not tested by the 
Trial Court and the High Court. Despite a specific defence taken 
by the appellant before both the Courts, the Courts simply did not 
examine the same in the manner required by law. The probability of 
the version put across by the appellant ought to have been tested 
against the circumstantial theory of the prosecution. In other words, 
it was incumbent upon the Courts below to have examined whether 
the defence taken by the appellant was a probable defence or not. 
The failure to do so has certainly resulted into a failure of justice 
and it is sufficient to reopen the evidence in the instant appeal, as 
we have done. 
23.	 We may now come to the next aspect of the case i.e. absence of 
motive and consequence thereof. It is trite law that in a case based 
on circumstantial evidence, motive is relevant. However, it is not 
conclusive of the matter. There is no rule of law that the absence 
of motive would ipso facto dismember the chain of evidence and 
would lead to automatic acquittal of the accused. It is so because 
the weight of other evidence needs to be seen and if the remaining 
evidence is sufficient to prove guilt, motive may not hold relevance. 
But a complete absence of motive is certainly a circumstance 
which may weigh in favour of the accused. During appreciation of 
evidence wherein favourable and unfavourable circumstances are 
sifted and weighed against each other, this circumstance ought to 
be incorporated as one leaning in favour of the accused. In Anwar 
Ali & Anr. v. State of Himachal Pradesh1, this Court analyzed the 
position of law thus: 
“24. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the 
accused that in the present case the prosecution has 
failed to establish and prove the motive and therefore the 
accused deserves acquittal is concerned, it is true that 
the absence of proving the motive cannot be a ground to 
1	
(2020) 10 SCC 166
422
Supreme Court Reports
reject the prosection case. It is also true and as held by 
this Court Suresh Chandra Bahri v. State of Bihar2 that if 
motive is proved that would supply a link in the chain of 
circumstantial evidence but the absence thereof cannot be 
a ground to reject the prosecution case. However, at the 
same time, as observed by this Court in Babu3, absence 
of motive in a case depending on circumstantial evidence 
is a factor that weighs in favour of the accused. In paras 
25 and 26, it is observed and held as under: 
“25. In State of U.P. v. Kishanpal4, this Court 
examined the importance of motive in cases of 
circumstantial evidence and observed : (SCC 
pp. 87-88, paras 38-39)
‘38. ... the motive is a thing which is 
primarily known to the accused themselves 
and it is not possible for the prosecution 
to explain what actually promoted or ex- 
cited them to commit the particular crime.
39. The motive may be considered as 
a circumstance which is relevant for 
assessing the evidence but if the evidence 
is clear and unambiguous and the circum- 
stances prove the guilt of the accused, the 
same is not weakened even if the motive is 
not a very strong one. It is also settled law 
that the motive loses all its importance in a 
case where direct evidence of eyewitnesses 
is available, because even if there may 
be a very strong motive for the accused 
persons to commit a particular crime, 
they cannot be convicted if the evidence 
of eye- witnesses is not convincing. In 
the same way, even if there may not be 
an apparent motive but if the evidence of 
2	
(1995) Supp. 1 SCC 80
3	
Babu v. State of Kerala, (2010) 9 SCC 189
4	
(2008) 16 SCC 73
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
423
Vaibhav v. The State of Maharashtra
the eyewitnesses is clear and reliable, the 
absence or inadequacy of motive cannot 
stand in the way of conviction.’
26. This Court has also held that the absence 
of motive in a case depending on circumstantial 
evidence is a factor that weighs in favour of the 
accused. (Vide Pannayar v. State of T.N.5)”
24.	 In the subsequent decision in Shivaji Chintappa Patil v. State of 
Maharashtra6, this Court relied upon the decision in Anwar Ali and 
observed as under:-
“27. Though in a case of direct evidence, motive would 
not be relevant, in a case of circumstantial evidence, 
motive plays an important link to complete the chain of 
circumstances. The motive......” 
More recently, in Nandu Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh (now 
Chhattisgarh)7, the position was reiterated by this Court in the 
following words: 
“10. In a case based on substantial evidence, motive 
assumes great significance. It is not as if motive alone 
becomes the crucial link in the case to be established by 
the prosecution and in its absence the case of Prosecution 
must be discarded. But, at the same time, complete 
absence of motive assumes a different complexion and 
such absence definitely weighs in favour of the accused.”
25.	 Thus, a complete absence of motive, although not conclusive, is a 
relevant factor which weighs in favour of the accused. No doubt, 
the final effect of such absence on the outcome of the case shall 
depend upon the quality and weight of surrounding evidence. In the 
present case, the testimonies of prosecution witnesses have invariably 
revealed that the appellant and the deceased were friends and there 
was no ill-will between them. Even the father of the deceased has 
testified to that effect. The relevance of motive in a case of homicide 
has been a subject of prolonged discussion. Ordinarily, in cases 
5	
(2009) 9 SCC 152
6	
(2021) 5 SCC 626
7	
Criminal Appeal No. 285 of 2022
424
Supreme Court Reports
involving direct evidence of the commission of crime, motive has little 
role to play as presence or absence of motive is immaterial if the 
commission of the crime stands proved through other evidence. Even 
otherwise, motiveless crimes are not unknown to the society. However, 
in cases purely based on circumstantial evidence, the absence of 
motive could raise serious questions and might even render the chain 
of evidence as doubtful. It is so because the presence of motive does 
the job of explaining the circumstantial evidence. For instance, in 
the facts of the present case, any evidence of enmity between the 
appellant and the deceased would have made suspicious the act of 
the appellant of taking the deceased to his home prior to his death. 
However, since the evidence suggests that they were friends, the 
fact that the appellant brought him home could not be termed as 
per-se incriminating. Therefore, motive explains the circumstances 
on record and enables the Court to draw better inference in a case 
based on circumstantial evidence. 
26.	 As regards the subsequent conduct of the appellant, before parting, 
we may also note that the same was consistent with the theory of 
accidental death. That his act of removal of the dead body and 
concealment of articles was a result of fear of his father - is quite 
natural. A young boy studying in first year of college, with no criminal 
background and with no motive in sight, would certainly have become 
scared on seeing that his friend has accidentally shot himself in the 
living room of his house with the pistol belonging to his father and is 
lying in a pool of blood. The subsequent conduct of cleaning up the 
scene and restoring the living room in its original shape, although 
punishable in law, does not become so unnatural that it could be 
made the basis to convict him for the commission of murder without 
additional evidence to that effect. More so, when such conclusion is 
not consistent with the surrounding evidence on record, especially 
medical evidence, as discussed above.
27.	 No doubt, the subsequent acts of cleaning up the crime scene and 
making false enquiries amount to disappearance of evidence and 
raise grave suspicion against the appellant. However, mere suspicion, 
no matter how grave, cannot take the place of proof in a criminal 
trial. The suspicion ought to have been substantiated by undeniable, 
reliable, unequivocal, consistent and credible circumstantial evidence, 
which does not leave the probability of any other theory. In the present 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
425
Vaibhav v. The State of Maharashtra
case, the theory put across by the appellant is fairly probable and is 
supported by medical evidence including the examination of the bullet 
injury and trajectory. Contrarily, the conclusion drawn by the Courts 
below is not supported by medical evidence and is not consistent 
with the bullet injury and trajectory, as discussed above. We have 
come far since our acknowledgement that in a case purely based 
on circumstantial evidence, it must be established that the chain of 
circumstances is complete. Such chain must be consistent with the 
conclusion of guilt only and must not support a contrary finding. The 
rigid principles underlying an examination based on circumstantial 
evidence are based on the premise that the very act of arriving at 
a finding of guilt on the basis of inferences must be performed with 
great caution and margin of error must be kept at a minimum. Having 
said so, we may also observe that naturally, there could be some 
inconsistencies in the chain of circumstances in the natural course of 
things and mere presence of inconsistencies does not automatically 
demolish the case of the prosecution. However, the prosecution 
must be able to explain the inconsistencies to the satisfaction of the 
Court. For, the ultimate test is the judicial satisfaction of the Court. 
In the present case, the counter probabilities and inconsistencies in 
the chain of circumstances have not been explained.
28.	 Momentarily, even if it is believed that the view taken by the Courts 
below is a possible view, it ought to have been examined whether 
a reasonable counter view was possible in the case. It is a time-
tested proposition of law that when a Court is faced with a situation 
wherein two different views appear to be reasonably possible, the 
matter is to be decided in favour of the accused. The benefit of a 
counter possibility goes to the accused in such cases.
29.	 In light of the foregoing discussion, we hereby conclude that the High 
Court has erred in arriving at the finding of guilt and in upholding 
the verdict of the Trial Court. The circumstantial evidence on record 
is not consistent and leaves a reasonable possibility of an alternate 
outcome i.e. of innocence of the appellant on the charges of murder 
and illegal usage of fire arm. Accordingly, the impugned order and 
judgment are partially set aside to the extent of conviction of the 
appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 302 IPC and 
Section 5 read with 25(1)(a) of Arms Act. Consequently, the appellant 
is acquitted for the offences under Section 302 of IPC and Section 5 
426
Supreme Court Reports
read with 25(1)(a) of Arms Act. His conviction under Section 201 IPC 
is sustained and he is sentenced for the period already undergone 
by him, for reasons discussed above. 
30.	 The captioned appeal stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms. 
Interim application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey