[2025] 2 S.C.R. 363 : 2025 INSC 145
Wahid 
v. 
State Govt. of NCT of Delhi
(Criminal Appeal No. 201 of 2020) 
04 February 2025
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and Manoj Misra,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The appellants herein have preferred appeal against their 
conviction. Appellant-W was convicted by the Trial Court for offence 
punishable u/s.392 r/w. s.397 IPC and appellant-A was convicted 
u/s.392 r/w. s.397 IPC and s.25(1) of the Arms Act. Their appeals 
were dismissed by the impugned order of the High Court.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.392, 397, 411 – Arms Act, 1959 – s.25 – 
Prosecution case was that complainant (PW-1) while travelling 
along with other passengers in a Gramin Sewa (mini bus) 
got robbed by four persons armed with weapons – FIR was 
registered – Appellant-W was convicted by the Trial Court for 
offence punishable u/s.392 r/w. s.397 IPC, but acquitted u/s.411 
IPC – Appellant-A was convicted and sentenced u/s. 392 r/w. 
s.397 IPC and s.25(1) of the Arms Act – Both the appellants 
filed appeal before the High Court which were dismissed – 
Correctness:
Held: Having perused the materials on record, prosecution has 
succeeded in establishing that on the night of 3.12.2011 the 
travellers of Gramin Sewa were robbed by four persons – However, 
mere proof of robbery is not sufficient to hold that the accused 
persons who were put to trial were the ones who committed the 
offence – In the instant case, neither the accused persons were 
named nor they were known either to the complainant or the 
witnesses from before – Prosecution case is rather too simple, that 
is, two days later, on 5.12.2011, PW-1 himself noticed the accused 
persons standing near DTC Bus Depot; immediately thereafter he 
informed the police about their presence; the police went to the 
spot, arrested them, and, upon search of those persons, recovered 
* Author
364
from them weapons including screw driver, as described in the FIR, 
used by the robbers to threaten the passengers – The aforesaid 
prosecution story of four accused persons, not belonging to one 
family, being spotted together at a public place (i.e., bus depot), 
that too near a police station, just two days after the incident, 
that too with weapons corresponding to the weapons held by the 
robbers mentioned in the FIR, appears too well-crafted to be real –  
More so, the arrest memorandums of the four accused which 
indicate that they were arrested post 10 pm on 5.12.2011 – This 
was quite an odd hour for any person to venture out on a winter 
night – Such a story appears improbable because PW-1, who is 
not a resident, and had suffered an act of robbery just two days 
before, in ordinary circumstances would not venture out so late 
in the night, just to hand over receipt regarding purchase of his 
robbed mobile – These circumstances make the prosecution 
story relating to the manner of arrest highly improbable – There is 
discrepancy regarding receiving information about the presence of 
accused persons at the bus depot from PW-1 – According to PW-10, 
information was given when the police party, which had already left 
the police station, met PW-1 at the red light – Whereas according to 
PW-13 the police team left the police station with the complainant 
(i.e., PW-1) and at bus depot, PW-1 pointed towards the accused 
persons – PW-1’s statement-in-chief is also on similar terms as 
that of PW-13 – However, there is no disclosure in the testimony 
of any of the police witnesses that before leaving the police 
station, the information provided by PW-1 regarding spotting the 
accused was entered in any of the diaries maintained at the police 
station – From the statements of key witnesses, and on cumulative 
analysis of the circumstances, while taking into consideration the 
statements of accused-appellants recorded u/s. 313 of the CrPC 
that they were picked up from home and falsely implicated by 
the police, a serious doubt is cast on the manner in which the 
prosecution claims to have arrested the accused – Admittedly, 
no test identification parade was conducted and the statement 
of PW-1 was recorded in court on 28.05.2013, that is, after 16 
months of the incident – In such circumstances, not much reliance 
can be placed on his statement – As far as dock identification is 
concerned, the remaining two eye witnesses identified the accused 
persons during their deposition in court in the year 2015, that is, 
after nearly 4 years of the incident – PW-6, resident of Aligarh, 
though stated that he identified the accused persons on 06.12.2011 
while they were in the police lock-up, admitted that he went to 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
365
Wahid v. State Govt. of NCT of Delhi
the police station without being summoned at 07:30 a.m – His 
statement does not inspire confidence – In the circumstance, 
when three eye witnesses stated that accused persons were 
not the ones who committed the crime and another one stated 
that it was too dark, therefore, he could not recognise, bearing 
in mind that the accused persons were not known to the eye 
witnesses from before, not much reliance can be placed on the 
dock identification – In such circumstances, and in absence 
of corroborative evidence of recovery of looted articles at the 
instance of or from the accused persons, in view of this Court, 
the appellants should have been given the benefit of doubt. 
[Paras 13, 15, 16, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – When FIR is lodged against 
unknown persons:
Held: In cases where the FIR is lodged against unknown persons, 
and the persons made accused are not known to the witnesses, 
material collected during investigation plays an important role to 
determine whether there is a credible case against the accused –  
In such type of cases, the courts have to meticulously examine 
the evidence regarding (a) how the investigating agency derived 
clue about the involvement of the accused in the crime; (b) the 
manner in which the accused was arrested; and (c) the manner in 
which the accused was identified – Apart from above, discovery/ 
recovery of any looted article on the disclosure made by, or at 
the instance of, the accused, or from his possession, assumes 
importance to lend credence to the prosecution case. [Para 14]
Case Law Cited
Manoj and Others v. State of Madhya Pradesh [2022] 9 SCR 452 : 
(2023) 2 SCC 353 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Arms Act, 1959; Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973.
List of Keywords
FIR; Robbery; FIR against unknown persons; Discovery of article; 
Recovery of article; Corroborative evidence; Dock identification; 
Test identification parade; Benefit of doubt.
366
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 201 
of 2020
From the Judgment and Order dated 15.11.2018 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in CRLA No. 1015 of 2017
Appearances for Parties
Fuzail Ahmad Ayyubi, Ibad Mushtaq, Ms. Akanksha Rai,  
Ms. Gurneet Kaur, Praveen Chaturvedi, Praveen Chaturvedi,  
Ms. Jyoti Chaturvedi, Tarun Kumar, Advs. for the Appellant.
Chirag M. Shroff, Adv. for the Respondent.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Manoj Misra, J.
1.	
These two appeals impugn a common judgment and order of the High 
Court of Delhi at New Delhi1 dated 15.11.2018, inter alia, passed in 
Criminal Appeal Nos. 1015 of 2017 and 1132 of 2017, whereby the 
appeals of the appellants preferred against the judgment and order 
of the Additional Sessions Judge-04 (Shahdara), KKD Courts, Delhi 
(i.e., the Trial Court) dated 16.08.2017 passed in Sessions Case No. 
78 of 2014 were dismissed.
2.	
The appellants along with two others were tried for offences 
punishable under Sections 392/397/411 of the Indian Penal Code, 
18602 and Section 25 of the Arms Act, 19593 in connection with F.I.R. 
No. 512 of 2011 at PS Nand Nagri, Delhi. 
3.	
Appellant Wahid was convicted by the Trial Court for offence 
punishable under Section 392 read with Section 397 IPC, but 
acquitted under Section 411 IPC. For his conviction under Section 
392 read with Section 397 IPC, Wahid was sentenced to undergo 
1	
The High Court
2	
IPC
3	
Arms Act
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
367
Wahid v. State Govt. of NCT of Delhi
rigorous imprisonment of seven years with fine of Rs. 5000/-, coupled 
with a default sentence of two years. Insofar as appellant Anshu 
is concerned, he was convicted and sentenced under Section 392 
read with Section 397 IPC to seven years of rigorous imprisonment 
along with fine of Rs. 5,000/-, coupled with a default sentence of two 
years; besides that he was also convicted for offence punishable 
under Section 25(1) of the Arms Act and sentenced thereunder to 
three years rigorous imprisonment along with fine of Rs. 2,000/-, 
coupled with a default sentence of six months.
4.	
There were two other accused, namely, Narender and Arif, who were 
also tried and convicted but since they are not before us, and it is 
reported that they have already served the sentence awarded to them, 
we do not propose to deal with the merits of their conviction, though 
they had also separately preferred appeal before the High Court. 
5.	
The appellants, Wahid and Anshu, had separately preferred appeal 
against their conviction before the High Court. Their appeals were 
dismissed by the impugned order. 
6.	
Aggrieved by the dismissal of their appeals, the appellants have 
preferred these appeals.
PROSECUTION CASE
7.	
Before we proceed to notice the submissions made before us, it 
would be apposite to notice in brief the prosecution case. 
8.	
The prosecution case bereft of unnecessary details is that while 
complainant (PW-1) was travelling along with four other passengers, 
driver and conductor in Gramin Sewa (a mini bus), at about 11:25 
p.m., in the night of 03.12.2011, four persons boarded the vehicle 
near Gagan Cinema. Those four thereafter threatened the passengers 
with knives, screw driver and country-made pistol, robbed them of 
their mobile(s) and cash and deboarded the vehicle. The driver 
thereafter took the passengers/victims to nearby police (PCR). The 
police officer present there was apprised of the incident and later a 
formal first information report (FIR) was registered at Police Station, 
Nand Nagri, Delhi as FIR No. 512/2011. 
9.	
The investigation of the case was carried out by PW-13 who, 
allegedly, on the basis of information provided by the complainant 
(PW-1), effected the arrest of all four accused on 05.12.2011 from 
368
near DTC Bus Depot at Nand Nagri. According to the prosecution, 
at the time of arrest, Narender alias Bhola (non-appellant) had a 
knife, Anshu (appellant in criminal appeal no. 202/2020) had a 
country-made pistol, Arif (non-appellant) had a button operated 
knife and Wahid (appellant in criminal appeal no. 201/2020) had 
a screw driver. Besides that, they had some cash. On 6.12.2011, 
according to the prosecution, looted mobile(s) were recovered 
separately at the instance of accused Narender and Arif i.e., non-
appellants. 
10.	 We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused 
the materials on record.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS 
11.	 The learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the FIR named 
none of the accused persons; the incident occurred in the darkness 
of night; the accused and the witnesses were not known to each 
other; the arrest of four accused, who were not related to each other, 
from one place and at one time, based on identification by PW-1 is 
highly doubtful; no test identification parade was conducted by the 
investigating agency to test whether the other passengers could 
recognise them; no looted articles were recovered from any of the 
accused; even recovery of knives, screw driver and country-made 
pistol is rendered doubtful by the statement of PW-1 to the effect 
that he was made to sign on blank papers; PW-2, PW-3 and PW-
12, who were also travelling in the same Gramin Sewa, specifically 
stated that the accused were not those who committed the robbery; 
PW-14, who was also travelling in that Gramin Sewa stated that it 
was dark and, therefore, he is unable to recognise the robbers; and, 
besides above, there are material contradictions in the statement 
of witnesses who were allegedly travelling in that Gramin Sewa. In 
these circumstances, benefit of doubt ought to have been extended 
to the accused persons. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE 
12.	 Per contra, the learned counsel for the State submitted that even if few 
witnesses have not supported the prosecution case, conviction can 
be sustained on the basis of testimony of other witnesses who had 
no motive to falsely implicate the accused. The testimony of PW-1, 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
369
Wahid v. State Govt. of NCT of Delhi
PW-5 and PW-6 is reliable and sufficient to hold the accused guilty. 
In these circumstances, once the courts below, after appreciating 
the evidence, have held the accused appellants guilty, no case is 
made out to interfere with the findings returned by the courts below 
in exercise of power under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
ANALYSIS
13.	 Having perused the materials on record, we find that prosecution 
has succeeded in establishing that on the night of 3.12.2011 the 
travellers of Gramin Sewa were robbed by four persons, who 
entered and exited the vehicle together after looting the travellers 
of their belongings such as cash and mobile phones, under threat 
of knife, country made pistol and screw driver. In respect of the 
above allegations, there is no discrepancy in the FIR and the eye 
witnesses (i.e., travellers, conductor and driver of Gramin Sewa) 
account. Moreover, the FIR of the incident has been lodged at the 
first opportunity. However, mere proof of robbery is not sufficient to 
hold that the accused persons who were put to trial were the ones 
who committed the offence. 
14.	 In cases where the FIR is lodged against unknown persons, and 
the persons made accused are not known to the witnesses, material 
collected during investigation plays an important role to determine 
whether there is a credible case against the accused. In such type 
of cases, the courts have to meticulously examine the evidence 
regarding (a) how the investigating agency derived clue about the 
involvement of the accused in the crime; (b) the manner in which 
the accused was arrested; and (c) the manner in which the accused 
was identified. Apart from above, discovery/ recovery of any looted 
article on the disclosure made by, or at the instance of, the accused, 
or from his possession, assumes importance to lend credence to 
the prosecution case.
Manner in which accused persons were arrested and recovery 
effected appears doubtful 
15.	 In the instant case, neither the accused persons were named nor 
they were known either to the complainant or the witnesses from 
before. Prosecution case is rather too simple, that is, two days later, 
on 5.12.2011, PW-1 himself noticed the accused persons standing 
370
near DTC Bus Depot at Nand Nagri; immediately thereafter he 
informed the police about their presence; the police went to the spot, 
arrested them, and, upon search of those persons, recovered from 
them weapons including screw driver, as described in the FIR, used 
by the robbers to threaten the passengers. 
16.	 The aforesaid prosecution story of four accused persons, not 
belonging to one family, being spotted together at a public place 
(i.e., bus depot), that too near a police station, just two days after 
the incident, that too with weapons corresponding to the weapons 
held by the robbers mentioned in the FIR, appears too well-crafted 
to be real. More so, when we consider it in conjunction with the 
arrest memorandums of the four accused which indicate that they 
were arrested post 10 pm on 5.12.2011. This is quite an odd hour 
for any person to venture out on a winter night. PW-1, who is a 
witness to the arrest memorandums, in his statement- in- chief said 
that while he was going to the police station to handover mobile 
purchase receipt, he spotted the accused persons. Such a story 
appears improbable because PW-1, who is not a resident of Nand 
Nagri, and had suffered an act of robbery just two days before, in 
ordinary circumstances would not venture out so late in the night, 
just to hand over receipt regarding purchase of his robbed mobile. 
These circumstances make the prosecution story relating to the 
manner of arrest highly improbable. Therefore, it should have put the 
court on guard as to look for corroborative pieces of evidence before 
accepting the prosecution story as credible. One such corroborative 
piece of evidence could be recovery of looted articles from the 
accused which, in the present case, is absent inasmuch as the trial 
court has already acquitted the appellant(s) of the charge of offence 
punishable under Section 411 IPC. 
17.	 Taking a guarded approach we have therefore carefully examined 
the prosecution evidence to be satisfied about the truthfulness of 
the prosecution story. Having done so, we found that there appears 
some discrepancy in the statement of PW-10 (i.e., head constable 
Mursaleen, posted at P.S. Nand Nagri) and PW-13 (i.e., Narendra 
Singh Rana, the investigating officer of the case) regarding the place 
where they received information about the presence of the accused 
persons at the bus depot. In this regard, PW-10 (HC Mursaleen) 
stated:
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
371
Wahid v. State Govt. of NCT of Delhi
“On 5/12/2011, I was posted at PS Nand Nagri, on that 
day, I joined the investigation in the present case. I 
along with IO Insp. Narendra Singh Rana, SI Rajiv, Ct. 
Kushal Pal, Ct. Jasvir went to red light Nand Nagri, where 
complainant Imtiaz met us, who informed to the IO that 
four persons involved in the present case are standing 
near bus depot, Nand Nagri. After receiving information, 
we rushed to the Nand Nagri, bus depot where we found 
that four persons were standing near bus depot. Upon 
seeing them, complainant pointed out towards them by 
stating that they are the same persons who had committed 
offense with him.”
On the other hand, PW-13, Inspector Narendra Singh Rana (i.e., 
the investigation officer of the case) stated:
“On 5.12.2011, I was posted as Inspector in PS Nand Nagri, 
Delhi. On that day, I along with SI Rajiv, HC Mursaleen, 
Ct. Jasvir and Kushal Pal along with complainant left 
the police station for investigation of the case. When we 
reached at main road in front of Nand Nagri DTC Depot, 
the complainant Imtiaz pointed out towards four young 
men i.e., Arif, Wahid, Narendra alias Bhola and Anshu, 
who are present in the court today. He further stated that 
the accused persons had robbed him and others in Gramin 
Seva bus while they were travelling from Nand Nagri to Gol 
Chakkar, Loni. I with the help of staff had apprehended the 
accused persons and interrogated and after interrogation 
all the accused persons were arrested…” 
The statement-in-chief of PW-1 (i.e., Imtiaz), however, corroborates 
the statement of PW-13 noticed above. PW-1 in his statement-in-
chief stated:
“The police had asked me to produce the copy of the 
receipt of my mobile phone vide which I had purchased 
the same. I went to my house and brought the same on 
the next day and produced the same before the police. 
Same is Ex PW1/C which bears my signature at point A. 
At that time when I was going to the PS, I saw all the four 
accused persons present in the court were standing at the 
372
bus stop of Nand Nagri. I told the police that the accused 
persons are standing at the bus stop of Nand Nagri. The 
police along with me immediately went there and on my 
pointing out they had apprehended all the four accused 
persons present in the court.” 
18.	 From the statements extracted above, what is clear is that, according 
to the prosecution, the police got information about the presence of 
accused persons at the bus depot from PW-1. However, where that 
information was given by PW-1 to the police, there is discrepancy in 
the testimony of witnesses who were part of the team that effected 
arrest of the accused persons. According to PW-10, information 
was given when the police party, which had already left the police 
station, met PW-1 at the red light of Nand Nagri whereas according 
to PW-13 the police team left the police station with the complainant 
(i.e., PW-1) and at bus depot, PW-1 pointed towards the accused 
persons. PW-1’s statement- in -chief is also on similar terms as that 
of PW-13 inasmuch as he states that when he spotted the accused 
persons near the bus depot, enroute to the police station, he went 
to the police station and informed the police about their presence 
there, whereafter the police team accompanied him to apprehend the 
accused persons. But if the version of PW-1 is correct, there ought 
to have been a record of receipt of such information at the police 
station. Because, in ordinary course, before leaving the police station, 
based on any information, the police officer enters the information in 
the relevant diary and then proceeds. Here there is no disclosure in 
the testimony of any of the police witnesses that before leaving the 
police station, the information provided by PW-1 regarding spotting 
the accused was entered in any of the diaries maintained at the 
police station. Besides that, PW-1, during cross-examination, made 
a self-contradictory statement which renders the prosecution case 
regarding arrest and recovery from the accused persons doubtful. 
The relevant portion of PW-1’s statement during cross-examination 
is extracted below: 
“I.O. of the case met him at the police station when the 
PCR took him and the accused persons to the police 
station. On the next day, he again met me at the bus stop 
of Nand Nagri where he remained with the I.O. for 10 to 
15 minutes, thereafter, the I.O. did not meet me. I saw the 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
373
Wahid v. State Govt. of NCT of Delhi
accused person present in the Court on the date of the 
occurrence and thereafter, I have seen them in the court 
on the date of this matter.
(emphasis supplied)
The underscored portion of PW-1’s statement would suggest that 
PW-1 had not seen the accused persons on 5.12.2011 (i.e. the date 
of arrest) because the date of the occurrence was 3.12.2011. 
19.	 In respect of recovery from the accused persons, PW-1, who was 
signatory to seizure memorandums, during cross-examination, stated:
“It is correct that IO obtained my signature on blank papers 
and had not recorded my statement. It is further correct 
that statement Ex. PW1/A bears my signature at point A, 
but at that time it was blank.” 
20.	 From the statements of key witnesses extracted above, and on 
cumulative analysis of the circumstances discussed above, while 
taking into consideration the statements of accused-appellants 
recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 that they were picked up from home and falsely implicated 
by the police, a serious doubt is cast on the manner in which the 
prosecution claims to have arrested the accused. Unfortunately, the 
High Court and the trial court were not circumspect while evaluating 
the prosecution evidence and thereby failed to test the prosecution 
evidence on the anvil of probability as was required in the facts 
of the case. For the reasons above, we hold that the arrest of the 
accused persons in the manner alleged by the prosecution is highly 
doubtful and unworthy of acceptance. 
21.	 Once we doubt the manner in which the accused were stated to 
have been arrested, the alleged recovery of screw driver, knives 
and country-made pistol made at the time of arrest is rendered 
unacceptable. Moreover, weapons /articles allegedly recovered are 
not so unique that they cannot be arranged. 
Dock Identification by few eye witnesses not reliable 
22.	 Normally, where accused persons are unknown and are not 
named in the FIR, if the prosecution case as regards the manner 
in which they were arrested is disbelieved, the Court should 
374
proceed cautiously with other evidence and objectively determine 
whether all other circumstances were proved beyond reasonable 
doubt.34In this light we shall now consider the evidence relating to 
identification of the accused persons. Admittedly, this is a case of 
night incident. Though seven eye witnesses of the incident were 
examined by the prosecution, only three (i.e., PW-1, PW-5 and 
PW-6) identified the accused in court. Out of the remaining four, 
three including the driver categorically stated that the accused 
persons are not those who robbed the passengers that night. 
The fourth one stated that it was too dark, therefore, he is unable 
to recognise. PW-1, at whose instance the arrest of the accused 
persons was allegedly effected, during cross-examination, stated 
that he saw the accused persons first on the date of the incident 
and second on the date fixed in the case. Admittedly, no test 
identification parade was conducted and the statement of PW-1 
was recorded in court on 28.05.2013, that is, after 16 months of 
the incident. In such circumstances, not much reliance can be 
placed on his statement. 
23.	 As far as dock identification by the remaining two eye witnesses is 
concerned, they identified the accused persons during their deposition 
in court in the year 2015, that is, after nearly 4 years of the incident. 
PW-6, though stated that he identified the accused persons on 
06.12.2011 while they were in the police lock-up, admitted that he 
went to the police station without being summoned. Interestingly, as 
per his description in the record, he is a resident of Aligarh. During 
cross-examination, he stated that he visited the police station on 
06.12.2011 at 07:30 a.m. Considering that he is a resident of Aligarh, 
his statement that he visited the police station without summons on 
06.12.2011 at 07:30 a.m. does not inspire our confidence. Admittedly, 
memory of those witnesses was not tested through a test identification 
parade. In such circumstances, when three eye witnesses stated 
that accused persons were not the ones who committed the crime 
and another one stated that it was too dark, therefore, he could not 
recognise, bearing in mind that the accused persons were not known 
to the eye witnesses from before, not much reliance can be placed 
on the dock identification. 
3.	
See Manoj and others v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2023) 2 SCC 353, paragraph 88
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
375
Wahid v. State Govt. of NCT of Delhi
24.	 In such circumstances, and in absence of corroborative evidence 
of recovery of looted articles at the instance of or from the accused 
persons, in our view, this was a fit case where the appellants should 
have been given the benefit of doubt. 
25.	 In view of the analysis and conclusions above, these appeals are 
allowed. The impugned judgment and order of the High Court is set 
aside. The appellants are acquitted of the charge(s) for which they 
were tried and convicted. They are reported to be on bail. They need 
not surrender. Their bail bonds stand discharged. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan