[2025] 10 S.C.R. 301 : 2025 INSC 1182
Vinishma Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 
v. 
State of Chhattisgarh & Anr.
(Civil Appeal No. 12487 of 2025)
06 October 2025
[Sanjay Kumar and Alok Aradhe,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the impugned tender condition meets the 
test of reasonableness and fairness and or whether the same 
constitutes an arbitrary criteria which excludes the other eligible 
bidders from participation thereby violating, the mandate contained 
in Arts.14 and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Arts.14, 19(1)(g) – Tender – Tender 
condition – Test of reasonableness and fairness – State 
of Chhattisgarh issued tender notices for the supply of 
Sports Kits to government schools – Tender condition as 
regards past performance restriction that bidders must have 
supplied sports goods worth at least Rs.6.00 crores to State 
Government agencies of Chhattisgarh in last three financial 
years – Appellant rendered ineligible for participation in the 
tender process – Writ petition by the appellant challenging 
the validity of the tender condition – Dismissed by the High 
Court – Correctness:
Held: Impugned tender condition arbitrary, unreasonable and 
discriminatory – Does not have any rational nexus to the object of 
ensuring effective supply of Sports Kits to the children in State – It 
offends the mandate of Art.14 and freedom of trade guaranteed 
by Art.19(1)(g) – Impugned tender condition has the effect of 
excluding bidders who though otherwise financially sound and 
technically competent, have no experience of supply of sports 
goods to the State Government agencies of Chhattisgarh in past 
three years – Object of public procurement is to secure quality 
goods and services for the benefit of public exchequer – Said 
object can be achieved by requiring the bidders to demonstrate 
financial capacity, technical experience, and past performance in 
* Author
302
Supreme Court Reports
contracts of similar nature, regardless of place of performance of 
the contract – To confine the eligibility to participate in the tender, 
within one State is not only irrational but is also disproportionate 
to the goal of ensuring effective delivery of Sports Kits – State 
while it enjoys the freedom to prescribe the conditions in the 
tender, cannot exercise that power in a manner that infringes 
upon constitutional guarantees, by closing the market to outsiders 
without just cause – Doctrine of level playing field requires 
that gates of competition be opened to all who are equally 
placed – Impugned tender condition excludes the competent and 
experienced suppliers, who may have executed contracts of far 
greater magnitude in other States or for the Central Government 
departments, from participating in the tender and has the impact of 
promoting cartelisation – Justification advanced by the State that 
Chhattisgarh being a Maoist affected area and only those with past 
experience of supply in the State to State Government agencies 
of Chhattisgarh can be relied upon, untenable – Impugned orders 
passed by the High Court as well as impugned tender notices 
quashed and set aside. [Paras 17-23]
Constitution of India – Art.19 (1) (g) – Doctrine of level playing 
field – Concept of:
Held: Doctrine of level playing field is an important concept while 
construing Art.19(1)(g) – Art.19(1)(g) confers fundamental right 
to carry out business to a company, it is entitled to invoke the 
doctrine of level playing field however, subject to public interest – 
Doctrine of level playing field provides the space within which 
equally placed competitors are allowed to bid so as to subserve 
larger public interest – Doctrine of level playing field requires that 
all equally placed competitors must be given an equal opportunity 
to participate in trade and commerce – It is designed to prevent 
the State from skewing the market in favour of few by erecting 
artificial barriers. [Paras 16, 18]
Case Law Cited
Association of Registration Plates v. Union of India and Ors. 
[2004] Supp. 6 SCR 496 : (2005) 1 SCC 679; Ramana Dayaram 
Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India & Ors. [1979] 3 
SCR 1014 : (1979) 3 SCC 489 : AIR 1979 SC 1628; Directorate 
of Education & Ors. v. EDUCOMP Datamatics Ltd. & Ors. [2004] 
2 SCR 1010 : (2004) 4 SCC 19; Global Energy Ltd. & Anr. v. 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
303
Vinishma Technologies Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Chhattisgarh & Anr.
Adani Exports Ltd. & Ors. [2005] 3 SCR 1108 : (2005) 4 SCC 
435; Shimni Utsch India Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. v. West Bengal Transport 
Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd. & Ors. [2010] 6 SCR 
1110 : (2010) 6 SCC 303; Icomm Tele Ltd. v. Punjab State Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board & Anr. [2019] 2 SCR 984 : (2019) 4 
SCC 401; Uflex Ltd. v. Government of Tamil Nadu & Ors. [2021] 7 
SCR 571 : (2022) 1 SCC 165; UOI & Ors. v. Bharat Forge Ltd. & 
Anr. [2022] 17 SCR 1012 : (2022) 17 SCC 188 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Tender condition; Test of reasonableness and fairness; 
Arbitrary criteria; Eligible bidders; State of Chhattisgarh; Tender 
notices for supply of Sports Kits; Government schools; Past 
performance restriction; Tender process; Rational nexus; Public 
procurement; Public exchequer; Doctrine of level playing field; 
Cartelisation; Maoist affected area; Fundamental right to carry out  
business.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 12487 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 11.08.2025 of the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in WPC No. 4266 of 2025
With
Civil Appeal No(s). 12488 and 12486 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
M. Dutt, Sr. Adv., Nitish Kumar Singh, Abhishek Raj, Amit Kumar 
Thakur, Harsh Abhishek, Anil Kumar Soni, Anand Kumar Soni, 
Niteen Kumar Sinha.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Praphulla Kumar Bharat, Sr. Adv./A.G., Balbir Singh, Sunil Otwani, 
Sr. Advs., Ms. Ankita Sharma, Arjun D. Singh, Ms. Ishika Neogi, 
Pallav Mongia, Anubhav Mishra, Ms. Kashish Lalwani,  Amit Soni, 
Rajat Khattry, Abhay Kumar, Shagun Ruhil.
304
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Alok Aradhe, J.
1.	
Leave granted. 
2.	
These appeals take exception to orders dated 11.08.2025 and 
12.08.2025 passed in three Writ Petitions preferred by the appellant. 
The High Court of Chhattisgarh by the said orders, has repelled the 
challenge to the impugned tender condition contained in three tender 
notices dated 21.07.2025 which were issued for supply of Sports Kits 
to the students of Government Primary School, Government Upper 
Primary Schools and Government High and Higher  Secondary 
Schools in the State of Chhattisgarh. 
3.	
The facts giving rise to filing of these appeals which lie in a narrow 
compass, are as under:
(I)	
FACTS 
4.	
The appellant is a Company registered under the Companies Act, 
2013 and claims to have experience of supplying Sports Kits to 
various Departments of the States of Bihar, Karnataka, Gujarat 
and Government of NCT Delhi. The respondent No. 1 is State of 
Chhattisgarh whereas respondent No. 2 is State Project Director, 
Samagra Shiksha Chhattisgarh State Project Office, Department of 
School Education, Government of Chhattisgarh.
5.	
The Integrated  Child Development Service (ICDS) Scheme is a 
Scheme for providing for supplementary nutrition, immunization and 
pre-school education to the children, launched in the year 1975, is 
a popular flagship program of the Central Government. The said 
Scheme provides for the integrated package of services, for the 
holistic development of the child and is a centrally sponsored scheme 
implemented by State Governments and the Union Territories. The 
Scheme is largely funded by the Government of India. 
6.	
The Samagra Shiksha Chhattisgarh State Project Office, Department 
of School Education, Chhattisgarh published three tender notices 
(hereinafter to be referred to as “impugned tender notices”) on 
21.07.2025 through Government-e-Market Place Portal  for supply 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
305
Vinishma Technologies Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Chhattisgarh & Anr.
of Sports Kits to the students of Primary School, Upper Primary 
Schools and High and Higher  Secondary Schools run by the State 
Government in the State of Chhattisgarh.  The Sports Kits were to 
be supplied to 5540 cluster resource centres situated across all 33 
districts in the State. The tender value of the contract was Rs.15.24 
crores, Rs.13.08 crores and Rs.11.49 crores. 
7.	
Section III(A) of the impugned tender notices prescribe qualification 
criteria with additional terms and conditions. The appellant was 
aggrieved by additional terms and conditions namely, condition 
Nos. 1, 4, 11 and 13, which rendered the appellant ineligible for 
participation in the impugned tender process. It, therefore, submitted 
a representation on 29.07.2025 to the State Project Director, Samagra 
Shiksha, School Education Department, Chhattisgarh. The aforesaid 
representation failed to evoke any response. The appellant thereupon 
filed three writ petitions, namely, Writ Petition (C) No. 4266 of 2025, 
Writ Petition (C) No. 4263 of 2025 and Writ Petition (C) No. 4274 
of 2025, before the High Court in which validity of the aforesaid 
impugned tender conditions was challenged. 
8.	
During the pendency of the writ petition by way of corrigendum dated 
07.08.2025 condition Nos. 1, 11, and 13 were deleted. The Division 
Bench of the High Court by a common order dated 11.08.2025 passed 
in Civil Writ Petition (C)  No. 4266 of 2025, Writ Petition (C) No. 4263 
of 2025 and by an order dated 12.08.2025  passed in  Writ Petition 
(C) No. 4274 of 2025, inter alia  held that the impugned eligibility 
condition namely, condition No. 4 with regard to past performance 
is of similar nature and purpose, as, the condition in Association 
of Registration Plates v. Union of India and Ors1. It was further 
held that respondents have demonstrated that the impugned tender 
condition is not unique to the State of Chhattisgarh but is prevalent in 
other States such as Gujarat, Assam, Delhi, Orissa and Jharkhand. It 
was further found by the High Court that a contract containing a similar 
condition, was awarded to the appellant in the State of Jharkhand. 
The High Court repelled the challenge to impugned tender condition 
on the ground of discrimination and unreasonableness.
9.	
It was further held by the Division Bench that State is entitled to 
prescribe the condition in the impugned tender notices, to ensure 
1	
(2005) 1 SCC 679
306
Supreme Court Reports
that selection of the most capable and reliable bidder takes place, to 
execute the public project of significant scale, sensitivity and public 
importance. It was also held that impugned tender condition is neither 
violative of Article 14 nor Article 19 (1)(g) of the Constitution of India 
and relates to legitimate object of ensuring technical competence, 
financial strength, operational capacity as well as long term reliability 
of successful bidder. Accordingly, the writ petitions preferred by the 
appellant were dismissed. In the aforesaid factual background, these 
appeals arise for our consideration.
(II)	 SUBMISSIONS OF APPELLANT
10.	 Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant submitted that High Court 
has failed to appreciate that decision of this Court in Association 
of Registration Plates (supra) has no application to the obtaining 
factual matrix of the case and therefore, erred in placing reliance 
on the said decision while deciding the writ petitions. It is further 
submitted that the impugned tender condition which prescribes 
that bidders must have supplied Sports Kits worth at least Rs.6.00 
crores (cumulative) to State Government agencies of Chhattisgarh 
in last 3 financial years is violative of Articles 14 and 19(1) (g) of 
the Constitution of India, as it excludes  competent suppliers from 
outside the State and discourages wider participation and fosters 
cartelisation. It is urged that the impugned tender condition excludes 
the appellant from participating in the impugned tender. It is therefore 
urged that the impugned common orders are liable to be quashed 
and set aside and the impugned tender condition is liable to be 
struck down.
(III)	 SUBMISSIONS OF RESPONDENT
11.	 On the other hand, learned Senior Counsel for respondent No. 2 
submitted that the tendering authority is well within its power to frame 
the impugned tender condition. It is further submitted that in view of 
geographic/social conditions of State of Chhattisgarh, the impugned 
tender condition is incorporated to safeguard timely delivery, ensure 
quality compliance and prevent supply chain disruptions. It is also 
submitted that impugned condition is prevalent in other States as 
well. It is pointed out that on 21.08.2025, financial bids have already 
been opened and the successful bidders have been identified. It is 
urged that in case this Court  interferes with the impugned tender 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
307
Vinishma Technologies Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Chhattisgarh & Anr.
process, the consequent re-tendering would consume a considerable 
time and substantial portion of academic year would stand forfeited.
12.	 Learned Senior counsel for respondent No. 1 has adopted the 
submissions made on behalf of respondent No. 2 and has submitted 
that the impugned tender condition has been incorporated with an 
object to ensure that successful bidder has the knowledge of the 
topography of the State of Chhattisgarh which is a Naxal affected 
State, so that Sports Kits could be timely delivered to the children 
of Government  Schools in the State.
(IV)	 ANALYSIS 
13.	 We have considered the rival submissions and have perused the 
record. For the facility of reference the impugned tender condition 
is extracted below :
“(4) Past Performance Restriction : Bidders must have 
supplied sports goods worth at least Rs.6.00 crores 
(cumulative) to State Government agencies of Chhattisgarh 
in the last three financial years (2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-
24 or 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25).”
14.	 The solitary question which arises for consideration in the instant 
appeals is whether the aforesaid impugned tender condition meets 
the test of reasonableness and fairness and or whether  the same 
constitutes an arbitrary  criteria which excludes the other eligible 
bidders from participation thereby violating, the mandate contained 
in Articles 14 and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. 
15.	 Before proceeding further, it is apposite to briefly advert to contours 
of judicial review with regard to tender conditions which are well 
delineated. A three Judge Bench of this Court in Ramana Dayaram 
Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India & Ors.2, held 
that discretion of the Government in granting the largesse, is not 
unlimited and the Government cannot give or withhold largesse in its 
arbitrary discretion or at its sweet will. It has further been held that 
Government cannot without adequate reason exclude any person 
from dealing with it or take away largesse arbitrarily. It also held that 
activities of the Government have a public element and therefore 
2	
(1979) 3 SCC 489; AIR 1979 SC 1628
308
Supreme Court Reports
there should be fairness and equality.  It is well settled in law that 
Government must have free hand in setting the terms of the tender 
and the Court cannot strike down the terms of the tender prescribed 
by the Authority merely because it feels some other terms in the 
tender would have been fairer, wiser or more logical3. It is equally well 
settled legal proposition that in the matter of formulating conditions 
of tender document unless the action of tendering authority is found 
to be arbitrary and malicious the Court would not interfere4. It is also 
well settled in law that a Court cannot sit over judgment on what 
should be the eligibility criteria in the tender notice unless the same 
is arbitrary, discriminatory or actuated by mala fides.5 
16.	 The principle of non-discrimination is embodied in Article 14 of the 
Constitution of India. Article 14 has to be read in conjunction with 
Rights conferred by other Articles like Article 21 of the Constitution 
of India. Article 21 of the Constitution of India refers to Right to Life 
which includes ‘opportunity’ as well. The doctrine of level playing 
field is an important concept while construing Article 19 (1) (g) of the 
Constitution of India. Article 19(1) (g) confers Fundamental Right to 
carry out business to a company, it is entitled to invoke the doctrine 
of level playing field which is however, subject to public interest. 
The doctrine of level playing field provides the space within which 
equally placed competitors are allowed to bid so as to subserve 
larger public interest. 6 
17.	 In the backdrop of well settled legal principles, we advert to the fact 
of the case in hand. The present tender is for supply of Sports Kits to 
the students of Primary School, Upper Primary School and High and 
Higher Secondary School run by the State Government in the State 
of Chhattisgarh. The eligibility criteria mentioned in the impugned 
tender notices must have rational nexus with the object sought to be 
achieved i.e., supply of good quality Sports Kits to students of the 
school, at the best price. The eligibility criteria in impugned notices 
therefore, should be framed in a manner which encourages wider 
3	
Directorate of Education & Ors. v. EDUCOMP Datamatics Ltd. & Ors. (2004) 4 SCC 19
4	
Global Energy Ltd. & Anr.  v. Adani Exports Ltd. & Ors. (2005) 4 SCC 435 - Shimni Utsch India Pvt. Ltd. 
& Anr. v. West Bengal Transport Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd. & Ors (2010) 6 SCC 303.
5	
Icomm Tele Ltd vs. Punjab State Water Supply and Sewerage Board & Anr. (2019) 4 SCC 401; Uflex 
Ltd. V. Government of Tamil Nadu & Ors. (2022) 1 SCC 165
6	
UOI & Ors. Bharat Forge Ltd. & ANR. (2022) 17 SCC 188
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
309
Vinishma Technologies Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Chhattisgarh & Anr.
participation and secures the best prize for the State, which in turn 
safeguards the public exchequer.
18.	 This Court in BHARAT FORGE supra has enunciated the doctrine 
level playing field and has stated that the same finds expression in 
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.  The doctrine of level playing field 
requires that all equally  placed competitors  must be given an equal 
opportunity to participate in trade and commerce. It is designed to 
prevent the State from skewing the market in favour of few by erecting 
artificial barriers. In the instant case, the impugned tender condition 
has the effect of excluding bidders who though otherwise financially 
sound and technically competent, have no experience of supply of 
sports goods to the State Government agencies of Chhattisgarh in 
past three years. The State by linking the eligibility criteria with past 
local supplies has created an artificial barrier, against the suppliers 
who had no past dealing with the State of Chhattisgarh. The impugned 
condition curtails the fundamental rights of the bidders, who have 
been ineligible to participate in the tenders. 
19.	 The object of public procurement is to secure quality goods and 
services for the benefit of public exchequer. The said object can be 
achieved by requiring the bidders to demonstrate financial capacity, 
technical experience, and past performance in contracts of similar 
nature, regardless of place of performance of the contract. To confine 
the eligibility to participate in the tender, within one State is not only 
irrational but is also disproportionate to the goal of ensuring effective 
delivery of Sports Kits. 
20.	 Such a restriction, therefore, cannot be justified as reasonable within 
the meaning of 19(6) of the  Constitution of India.  The State while it 
enjoys the freedom to prescribe the conditions in the tender, cannot 
exercise that power in a manner that infringes upon constitutional 
guarantees, by closing the market to outsiders without just  cause. 
The doctrine of level playing field requires that gates of competition 
be opened to all who are equally placed. The impugned tender 
condition excludes the competent and experienced suppliers, who 
may have executed contracts of far greater magnitude in other States 
or for the Central Government departments, from participating in the 
tender and has the impact of promoting cartelisation. The impugned 
condition operates as a closed door to outsiders and restricts the 
wider participation of bidders and restricts competition. The impugned 
310
Supreme Court Reports
tender condition, therefore, is violative of Article 14 and also offends 
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. 
21.	 The justification advanced by the State that Chhattisgarh being a 
Maoist affected area and only those with past experience of supply in 
the State to State Government agencies of Chhattisgarh can be relied 
upon, is untenable for several reasons. Firstly, the tender in question 
is not for security sensitive equipment but is for supply of Sports Kits 
which does not involve, any special risk or security repercussions. 
Secondly, only some districts of Chhattisgarh are affected by Maoist 
activities, and it is incorrect to treat the entire State, as uniformly 
affected by Naxalites, for exclusion of   other eligible bidders. Thirdly, 
a successful bidder, who may not be conversant with the topography 
can engage a local supply chain to supply the Sports Kits. 
22.	 In the light of aforesaid discussion this Court finds that impugned 
tender condition is arbitrary, unreasonable and is discriminatory. The 
same does not have any rational nexus to the object of ensuring 
effective supply of Sports Kits to the children in State. It offends the 
mandate of Article 14 and freedom of trade guaranteed by Article 
19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. 
(V)	 CONCLUSION
23.	 In the result, the impugned orders dated 11.08.2025 and 12.08.2025 
passed in Writ Petition (C) No. 4266 of 2025, Writ Petition (C) No. 4263 
of 2025 and Writ Petition (C) No. 4274 of 2025 respectively by the High 
Court as well as impugned tender notices dated 21.07.2025 issued 
by Department of School Education, Government of Chhattisgarh 
for supply of Sports Kits to students of Government Primary, Upper 
Primary, High and Higher Secondary Schools are quashed and set 
aside. Needless to state that respondents are at liberty to issue 
fresh notices inviting tenders.  Accordingly, the appeals are allowed.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain