[2025] 9 S.C.R. 522 : 2025 INSC 1078
Shyam Lal 
v. 
Shriram General Insurance Co. Ltd. and Others
(Civil Appeal No(s). 5177-81 of 2022)
04 September 2025
[K. Vinod Chandran* and N.V. Anjaria, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the order of the High Court directing pay and recovery 
is sustainable.
Headnotes†
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 – Motor Vehicle Accident Claim – 
Owner of utility vehicle was involved in an accident – Five 
claim petitions were filed – The High Court found that the 
utility vehicle was not entitled to carry passengers by reason 
of the specific restriction in the policy which is evident from 
“Limitation as to Use” – The High Court ordered “pay and 
recover” – Correctness:
Held: It was admitted by the Branch Manager in charge of the 
Insurance Company that the insurance policy was issued to the 
owner, in accordance with the rules and looking at the registration 
certificate, wherein the category of the vehicle is registered as “Utility 
Van” – The witness further admitted that the seating capacity in 
the policy is also written as 4+1 and that there is no recital in the 
policy document regarding the premium for passengers having not 
been charged – It was also admitted that the utility van is a vehicle 
in which half portion is used for carrying of goods and half portion 
in front is used for carrying passengers – Hence, there can be no 
restriction insofar as the ‘limitation as to use’ as found in the policy 
which applies only to goods vehicles while the present vehicle as per 
the certificate of registration is a utility vehicle and the permit issued 
is of a contract carriage – The package policy was issued by the 
Insurance Company after looking at the certificate of registration and 
the permit issued and it has been clearly specified that the vehicle 
is entitled to carry 4+1 passengers in addition to the goods – The 
Insurance Company in the above circumstance, cannot wriggle 
out of its liability to indemnify the owner – As far as the contention 
regarding 5 persons having filed claim petitionss, indicating more 
* Author
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
523
Shyam Lal v. Shriram General Insurance Co. Ltd. and Others
than 4 persons having been carried in the vehicle is concerned, 
the eyewitness, PW2 who saw the accident clearly stated that just 
prior to the accident, he saw the vehicle coming with 4 passengers 
in it – There was no challenge to the said evidence in the cross 
examination by the Insurance Company – There is absolutely no 
reason to sustain the order of the High Court directing pay and 
recovery – The liability is on the Insurance Company and that has 
to be satisfied fully by the Insurance Company. [Paras 6, 7]
List of Acts
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923.
List of Keywords
Motor vehicle accident claim; Insurance company; Certificate of 
registration; Contract carriage; Seating capacity of vehicle; Pay 
and recovery; Overloading; Valid package policy; Goods carriage; 
Insurance policy; Specific restriction in insurance policy.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 5177-81 
of 2022
From the Judgment and Order dated 10.04.2019 of the High Court 
of Uttarakhand at Nainital in AFO Nos. 604, 605, 606, 607, and 
608 of 2016
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Manohar Pratap, Ms. Bhavana Bisht.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Kshitij Mittal, Aryan Sharma, Mukesh Kumar.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K. Vinod Chandran, J.
The owner of the utility vehicle involved in an accident, which gave 
rise to 5 claim petitions, has filed the instant appeal challenging the 
524
Supreme Court Reports
order of “pay and recover” issued by the High Court in the appeal 
filed by the Insurance Company. The High Court found that the utility 
vehicle was not entitled to carry passengers by reason of the specific 
restriction in the policy which is evident from “Limitation as to Use”. 
The contention was that the 4 passengers excluding the driver who 
were entitled to travel in the utility vehicle, are only employees who 
come under the purview of Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923.
2.	
The learned Counsel for the appellant-owner took us through the 
Certificate of Registration (Annexure P1), the contract carriage 
permit (Annexure P2) and the package policy (Annexure P3) which 
indicated the seating capacity including the driver to be 4+1. It is 
argued that the limitation as to use insofar as carriage of goods 
applies only to a goods vehicle and not an utility vehicle which can 
carry both passengers and goods. There is no ground for ordering 
“pay and recovery” in the facts and circumstances of the case, 
especially when the Insurance Company had not taken a defence 
that the vehicle was insured as a goods vehicle. The claimants are 
the legal representatives of the deceased who were either travelling 
in the vehicle or standing/walking at the accident site.
3.	
The learned Counsel for the Insurance Company, however, contended 
that there could be no plea of goods being carried in the vehicle 
because one of the deceased was a student and the others; a 
catering employee, a painter, an employee in the postal department 
and an unemployed man. The restriction squarely applies, and the 
passengers cannot be said to be validly covered under the policy. 
It is also argued that even if the passengers are said to be owners 
of goods or his representative, there could not have been more 
than four passengers in the vehicle, when the claim petitions were 
numbering five. There was also an allegation of nine deaths having 
occurred in the accident, which clearly indicates overloading.
4.	
The appeal was filed only on the ground of the limitation in the 
policy. The Tribunal found the negligence and rashness in the driving 
of the utility vehicle and the vehicle is covered by a valid package 
policy issued by the Insurance Company are established. Having 
gone through the records, we see that the certificate of registration 
indicates the class of the offending vehicle to be an Utility Van which 
has a seating capacity of 5, including the driver. The permit issued 
as a contract carriage, also allows 5 passengers to be carried in 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
525
Shyam Lal v. Shriram General Insurance Co. Ltd. and Others
the vehicle. A ‘contract carriage’ as defined under Section 2(7) of 
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 means a motor vehicle which carries a 
passenger or passengers for hire or reward and is engaged under an 
express or implied contract and includes a motor cab notwithstanding 
that separate fares are charged for its passengers. This is in clear 
distinction with a ‘goods carriage’ defined under Section 2(14) of 
the Act which is a vehicle constructed or adapted or used solely for 
the carriage of goods.
5.	
The package policy produced shows the make & model as seen from 
the Certificate of Registration indicating the vehicle to be manufactured 
by Mahindra & Mahindra, a Bolero Camper Utility DC, 2WD, BS2. 
The utility vehicle obviously is for carriage of passengers and goods; 
the passengers not being necessarily the owners of the goods as 
seen from the seating capacity of 4+1 including the driver specified 
also in the insurance policy. In the above circumstances, it cannot 
be said that the vehicle was insured as a goods vehicle, which is 
not specified in the policy and hence ‘the limitation as to the use 
only of carriage of goods’ does not apply; the utility vehicle being the 
vehicle registered with a seating capacity of 5 passengers including 
the driver, and the permit issued being one of a contract carriage also 
indicating 5 passengers including the driver to be carried within it. 
6.	
In this context, we have also gone through the evidence of the Branch 
Manager in charge of the Insurance Company which is produced as 
Annexure No.P6. In chief examination, it was stated that though the 
seating capacity is shown as 4+1 including the driver, the premium 
was taken only for the owner driver and no separate amounts 
were charged for the passengers; which is contrary to the recitals 
in the document. In cross examination, the witness admitted that 
the insurance of any vehicle is issued after perusing the records of 
the vehicle like, registration certificate, fitness and permit validity. It 
was admitted that the insurance policy was issued to the owner, in 
accordance with the rules and looking at the registration certificate, 
wherein the category of the vehicle is registered as “Utility Van”. The 
witness further admitted that the seating capacity in the policy is also 
written as 4+1 and that there is no recital in the policy document 
regarding the premium for passengers having not been charged. 
It has also been deposed, which is again a clear admission, that 
the utility van is a vehicle in which half portion is used for carrying 
526
Supreme Court Reports
of goods and half portion in front is used for carrying passengers. 
Hence, there can be no restriction insofar as the ‘limitation as to use’ 
as found in the policy which applies only to goods vehicles while the 
present vehicle as per the certificate of registration is a utility vehicle 
and the permit issued is of a contract carriage. The package policy 
was issued by the Insurance Company after looking at the certificate 
of registration and the permit issued and it has been clearly specified 
that the vehicle is entitled to carry 4+1 passengers in addition to the 
goods. The Insurance Company in the above circumstance, cannot 
wriggle out of its liability to indemnify the owner. 
7.	
The contention regarding 5 persons having filed claim petitions, 
indicating more than 4 persons having been carried in the vehicle, 
though is attractive has no significance on the facts as revealed from 
the order of the Tribunal. The Tribunal, on the basis of the evidence 
led, clearly found that in addition to the passengers carried in the 
vehicle, some pedestrians were also dragged down by the vehicle 
when the accident occurred. The eyewitness, PW2 who saw the 
accident clearly stated that just prior to the accident, he saw the 
vehicle coming with 4 passengers in it. There was no challenge to the 
said evidence in the cross examination by the Insurance Company. 
The vehicle having fallen down the gorge, with the passengers as 
also the pedestrians, one of the claim petitions is of a pedestrian, 
which is not clearly demarcated for reason of the 5 persons having 
been extricated at the accident site from and around the vehicle. 
We find absolutely no reason to sustain the order of the High Court 
directing pay and recovery. The liability is on the Insurance Company 
and that has to be satisfied fully by the Insurance Company.
8.	
Before leaving the matter, we notice that insofar as one of the claim 
petitions, MACT Case No. 134 of 2014 relatable to the compensation 
for the death of one Jagdish Prasad Gaur, there was a contention 
taken in the appeal filed before the High Court by the Insurance 
Company that no deduction towards 1/3rd of the amount determined 
as compensation for loss of income, as personal expenses has been 
made by the Tribunal. We did not have the benefit of going through 
the order of the Tribunal since the same was not produced before us. 
However, in the fitness of things especially since just compensation 
is to be awarded, we are of the opinion that in computing the income 
at the time of disbursing the amount, the Tribunal shall ensure that 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
527
Shyam Lal v. Shriram General Insurance Co. Ltd. and Others
1/3rd deduction is made from the total loss of income computed 
before disbursing the amounts directed in MACT Case No. 134 of 
2014 relatable to Appeal No. 607 of 2016. 
9.	
The appeals hence stand allowed with the above reservation, setting 
aside the judgment of the High Court and restoring the order of the 
Tribunal with the modification to one of the awards as mentioned 
above.
10.	 Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan