[2025] 2 S.C.R. 376 : 2025 INSC 146
Union of India & Anr. 
v. 
Tarsem Singh & Ors.
(Miscellaneous Application No. 1773 of 2021 
In 
Civil Appeal No. 7064 of 2019)
04 February 2025
[Surya Kant* and Ujjal Bhuyan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the judgment in Union of India v. Tarsem Singh & Ors. is 
applicable prospectively or extends retrospectively.
Headnotes†
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 – National Highways Act, 1956 – 
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 – The 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) seeks clarification 
regarding the judgment titled Union of India & Anr. v. Tarsem 
Singh & Ors to the extent that the aforementioned judgment is 
to be applied prospectively, thereby precluding the reopening 
of cases where land acquisition proceedings have already 
been completed and the determination of compensation had 
also attained finality:
Held: The prayer in the instant Application expressly seeks 
clarification that the decision in Tarsem Singh should be deemed 
to operate prospectively only – However, in considered view of 
this Court, granting such a clarification would effectively nullify 
the very relief that Tarsem Singh intended to provide, as the 
prospective operation of it would restore the state of affairs to 
the same position as it was before the decision was rendered – 
The broader purpose behind Tarsem Singh was to resolve and 
put quietus upon the quagmire created by s.3J of the NHAI Act, 
which led to the unequal treatment of similarly situated individuals 
– The impact of s.3J was short-lived, owing to the applicability of 
the 2013 Act upon the NHAI Act from the date of 01.01.2015 – 
* Author
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
377
Union of India & Ors. v. Tarsem Singh & Ors.
As a result, two classes of landowners emerged, devoid of any 
intelligible differentia: those whose lands were acquired by the 
NHAI between 1997 and 2015, and those whose lands were 
acquired otherwise – This must be viewed in the light of the 
principle that when a provision is declared unconstitutional, any 
continued disparity strikes at the core of Article 14 and must be 
rectified, particularly when such disparity affects only a select 
group – To illustrate, rendering the decision in Tarsem Singh as 
prospective would create a situation where a landowner whose 
land was acquired on 31.12.2014 would be denied the benefit of 
‘solatium’ and ‘interest’, whereas a landowner whose land was 
acquired the very next day, 01.01.2015-the date on which the 
ordinance was promulgated, to read the 2013 Act into the NHAI 
Act, would be entitled to these statutory benefits – No merit in 
the contentions raised by the applicant – Principles established in 
Tarsem Singh regarding the beneficial nature of granting ‘solatium’ 
and ‘interest’ while emphasising the need to avoid creating unjust 
classifications lacking intelligible differentia are reaffirmed – 
Consequently, the present Miscellaneous Application is dismissed.  
[Paras 17, 18, 19, 25]
Case Law Cited
Union of India v. Tarsem Singh [2019] 13 SCR 49 : (2019) 9 SCC 
304; National Highway Authority of India v. Resham Singh, 2023 : 
PHHC : 053158-DB; Lalita v. Union of India, 2002 SCC Online 
Kar 569; T. Chakrapani v. Union of India, 2011 SCC Online 
Mad 2881; Sunita Mehra v. Union of India (2019) 17 SCC 672; 
Union of India v. M. Pachamuthu, WA Nos. 62-81/2019; Gurpreet 
Singh v. Union of India [2006] Supp. 7 SCR 422 : (2006) 8 SCC 
457 – referred to.
List of Acts
Land Acquisition Act, 1894; National Highways Act, 1956; Right 
to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013; Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Land Acquisition; Solatium; Interest; Intelligible differentia; Article 14 
of Constitution; Section 3J of National Highways Act, 1956; 
Determination of compensation; Prospectively; Retrospectively.
378
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Miscellaneous Application 
No. 1773 of 2021
In
Civil Appeal No. 7064 of 2019
From the Judgment and Order dated 19.09.2019 of the Supreme 
Court of India in C.A. No. 7064 of 2019
With
Civil Appeal Nos. 1473-1541, 1542, 1543, 1544, 1545, 1546,  
1547-1553, 1554, 1555, 1556-1561 And 1562 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General, Ms. Kalyani Bhide, Kalyani Bhide, 
Anurag A Gharote, Anish Kathane, Mrs. Pragya Baghel, Maulik 
Nanavati, Ms. Jaikriti S. Jadeja, Pratyush Shrivastav, Ms. Manvi 
Damle, Shivang Goel, Ishaan Aggarwal, Arvind Gupta, Satyajit A 
Desai, Harnish Ghadiya, Siddharth Gautam, Abhinav K. Mutyalwar, 
Sachin Singh, Ananya Thapliyal, Ms. Anagha S. Desai, Preetraj 
Dhok, M/S. M. V. Kini & Associates, K. K. Mani, Ms. T. Archana, 
Rajeev Gupta, Sumit Gupta, Akshay Tiwari, Venkita Subramoniam 
T.R, Advs. for the Appellant.
Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General, V Krishnamurthy, Sr. A.A.G., C U 
Singh, Sr. Adv., P Sivakumar, Y Arunagiri, Raghunatha Sethupathy 
B (for P. Soma Sundaram), Satyajit A Desai, Harnish Gadhia, 
Harnish Ghadiya, Siddharth Gautam, Abhinav K. Mutyalwar, Ms. 
Anagha S. Desai, Maulik Nanavati, Ms. Jaikriti S. Jadeja, Pratyush 
Srivastava, Ms. Manvi Damle, Shivang Goel, Ishaan Aggarwal, Ms. 
Jay Jaimini Pandey, Satish Pandey, Ms. Lalita Gupta, Abhishek 
Kumar Singh, Anirudh Bankura, Ms. Vijay Lakshmi, Braj Kishora 
Mishre, Pradeep Kumar Arya, Prateek Singh, Rupesh Goel, Aditya 
Yadav, Gaurav Chaudhry, Ms. Garima Chaudhry, Chander Shekhar 
Ashri, Arvind Gupta, D.Kumanan, Ms. Deepa S, Sheikh F Kalia, 
Veshal Tyagi, Chinmay Anand Panigrahi, Ms. Azka Sheikh Kalia, 
Mrs. Kalyani Bhide, Gharote Anurag A, Anish Kathane, Nitin Lonkar, 
Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, Siddharth 
Mittal, Abhijeet Varshney, Deepak Agarwal, Darshan Sejwal, Sumit 
Kumar Sharma, Mrs. Shilpa G Mittal, Somiran Sharma, Raghuvir 
Singh Patil, S C Malhotra, Kunal Kishore, Sudhansu Palo, Vivak 
Verma, Vijay Mittal, Mayank Kshirsagar, Advs. for the Respondent.
S.C. Malhotra, Bishen Singh, Ms. Sadhna, Advs. for the Intervenor.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
379
Union of India & Ors. v. Tarsem Singh & Ors.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
Surya Kant, J.
1.	
The instant Miscellaneous Application, filed by the National Highways 
Authority of India (NHAI) through its Project Director, seeks clarification 
regarding the judgment dated 19.09.2019, passed in Civil Appeal 
No. 7064 of 2019, titled Union of India & Anr. v. Tarsem Singh & 
Ors,1 to the extent that the aforementioned judgment is to be applied 
prospectively, thereby precluding the reopening of cases where 
land acquisition proceedings have already been completed and the 
determination of compensation had also attained finality. 
2.	
This Miscellaneous Application is tagged with several appeals filed 
by the NHAI challenging the decisions of various High Courts at the 
instance of private parties, wherein relief has been granted relying on 
the judgment dated 19.09.2019. The High Courts vide these decisions 
have either (i) awarded ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ to the expropriated 
landowners; or (ii) directed the Competent Authority (Land Acquisition, 
National Highways) to consider and decide representations made by 
the landowners for the grant of ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ in light of the 
aforementioned judgment of this Court. This also includes SLP (C) 
No. 14942/2019 titled ‘K. Raju and others v. The Project Director, 
National Highways Authority of India and others’, which has been 
preferred by a private party assailing the decision of the Madras 
High Court dated 01.04.2019, whereby the relief of ‘solatium’ and 
‘interest’ was directed to be raised before the Competent Authority.
3.	
Additionally, SLP (C) Diary No. 52538/2023 titled ‘Raj Kumar and 
another v. Union of India and others’, has been preferred by a 
private party whose lands were acquired by NHAI. In this instance, 
the Punjab and Haryana High Court has rejected their claim for 
the award of ‘Additional Market Value’ relying upon its decision in 
National Highway Authority of India v. Resham Singh,2 whereby 
the landowners were held entitled to ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’, but their 
1	
Union of India v. Tarsem Singh, (2019) 9 SCC 304. 
2	
National Highway Authority of India v. Resham Singh, 2023:PHHC:053158-DB.
380
claim for the grant of ‘Additional Market Value’ was declined. These 
benefits were granted / partly declined in terms of Sections 23(2) and 
28 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1894 Act), which were read 
into the provisions of the National Highways Act, 1956 (NHAI Act). 
A.	
Brief Legislative Background
4.	
At this juncture, it is pertinent to briefly delve into the legislative 
background of Section 3J of the NHAI Act vis-à-vis the 1894 Act 
and the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (2013 Act).
5.	
The erstwhile 1894 Act facilitated the acquisition of land by the 
Government for public purposes, outlining a process that included 
the identification of land, issuance of a notification announcing the 
intent to acquire, followed by inquiries and hearings to determine 
the compensation payable to landowners. Additionally, the 1894 Act 
provided for the grant of ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ under Sections 23 
and 28. For a considerable period, the NHAI Act operated alongside 
the 1894 Act, with its provisions being pari materia to those of the 
latter.
6.	
Be that as it may, Section 3J of the NHAI Act has been fraught with 
controversy from its very inception. Section 3J, along with several 
other provisions, were inserted into the NHAI Act vide the National 
Highways Laws (Amendment) Act, 1997 (1997 Amendment), 
with the objective of ‘creating an environment to promote private 
investment in National Highways, to speed up construction of 
highways and to remove bottlenecks in their proper management’. 
In this regard, one of the impediments to the speedy implementation 
of highway projects was recognised to be the inordinate delay in 
the acquisition of land. 
7.	
Accordingly, the NHAI Act was amended, with a number of measures 
undertaken to accelerate the procedure of acquisition, whereby a 
determination of compensation would be made by the Competent 
Authority, and if not accepted by either party, it would then be 
determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Central Government. 
In addition, this newly introduced process did not envisage either 
‘solatium’ or ‘interest’ and rather declared through Section 3J that 
‘nothing in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 shall apply to an acquisition 
under this Act’.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
381
Union of India & Ors. v. Tarsem Singh & Ors.
8.	
Upon its incorporation and coming into force, several High Courts 
began to strike down Section 3J of the NHAI as unconstitutional in 
the light of its effect of treating similarly situated individuals differently. 
It was first struck down by the Karnataka High Court on 11.10.2002 
in the case of Lalita v. Union of India3 and then subsequently on 
28.03.2008 by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Golden Iron 
and Steel (supra). This trend continued to be followed by the Madras 
High Court in T. Chakrapani v. Union of India.4
9.	
Meanwhile, the 2013 Act came into force with effect from 01.01.2014 
and by the promulgation of Amendment Ordinance 9 of 2014, 
the 2013 Act was amended from 01.01.2015, thereby making its 
provisions applicable to numerous enactments, including the NHAI 
Act. Subsequently, upon the lapsing of the Ordinance, a notification 
dated 28.08.2015 was issued under Section 105, read with Section 
113, wherein it was specified that the provisions of the 2013 Act 
would apply to acquisitions carried out under the NHAI Act. 
10.	 Thereafter, a batch of appeals challenging the decision in 
T. Chakrapani (supra) were disposed of by this Court on 21.07.2016, 
following a statement made by the then Solicitor General of India 
that ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ would be paid on acquisitions made 
under the NHAI Act.5 However, the batch of appeals challenging the 
decision of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Golden Iron and 
Steel (supra) remained pending. In two other appeals, challenging 
the decisions of the Delhi High Court and the Punjab and Haryana 
High Court, this Court disposed them off, holding that ‘solatium’ and 
‘interest’ would be awardable to cases pending as on the date of 
the decision of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Golden Iron 
and Steel (supra) i.e. 28.03.2008.6 
11.	 This prompted NHAI to withdraw the appeals challenging the decision 
in Golden Iron and Steel (supra). In similar cases, the Madras High 
Court also awarded payment of ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’.7 Thereafter, 
the decision in Tarsem Singh (supra) was delivered by this Court, 
3	
Lalita v. Union of India, 2002 SCC Online Kar 569.
4	
T. Chakrapani v. Union of India, 2011 SCC Online Mad 2881.
5	
Civil Appeal Nos. 129-159/2014.
6	
Sunita Mehra v. Union of India, (2019) 17 SCC 672.
7	
Union of India v. M. Pachamuthu, WA Nos. 62-81/2019.
382
making clear the legal position on the grant of ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ 
vis-à-vis the NHAI Act. 
12.	 As already iterated, this triggered a chain reaction of writ petitions 
being filed across various High Courts by aggrieved landowners 
whose lands had been acquired by the NHAI in the period between 
1997 and 2015 and who had not been granted the benefit of ‘solatium’ 
or ‘interest’, seeking parity with those who were found entitled to 
these statutory benefits prior to 1997 and post-2015. Since the 
High Courts have restored parity in these cases, NHAI has sought 
clarification of our judgement in Tarsem Singh (supra).
B.	
Contentions on behalf of the parties
13.	 Mr. Tushar Mehta, Learned Solicitor General of India, appearing 
on behalf of the Applicant, NHAI, made the following submissions:
a)	
The judgment in Tarsem Singh (supra) is applicable 
prospectively from the date of its pronouncement, i.e., 
19.09.2019, and not retrospectively from the date of enforcement 
of the 1997 Amendment. Granting relief in cases that have 
already been concluded is inconsistent with the principles laid 
down by the Constitution Bench in Gurpreet Singh v. Union 
of India.8 
b)	
If the judgment in Tarsem Singh (supra) is applied retrospectively, 
it would necessitate reopening all acquisitions made by the NHAI 
between 1997 and 2015. Consequently, the Government would 
be obligated to compensate every claimant whose land was 
acquired by the NHAI during this period. 
c)	
Permitting the decision to operate retrospectively would lead to 
an influx of mass litigation, requiring the reopening of closed 
cases. This would have significant economic ramifications, 
placing an additional burden of approximately Rupees 92.18 
crores on the Public Exchequer for the payment of ‘interest’ 
and ‘solatium’ for the delayed period. 
d)	
Reopening such cases would directly contravene the doctrine 
of immutability, a fundamental principle which holds that a 
8	
Gurpreet Singh v. Union of India, (2006) 8 SCC 457.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
383
Union of India & Ors. v. Tarsem Singh & Ors.
judgment, once attaining finality, becomes unalterable and 
cannot be modified. Furthermore, any claims now raised by 
private parties would be barred by the principles of delay and 
laches.
14.	 Per contra, the counsel(s) representing the landowners refuted the 
claims made by the NHAI and contended as follows:
a)	
Declaring the judgment in Tarsem Singh (supra) as prospective 
would render redundant the entire exercise of ensuring parity, 
given that the 2013 Act now governs the field, making the 
grant of ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ a requisite. Tarsem Singh 
(supra) was delivered specifically with a view to address the 
grievances of landowners who were denied the statutory benefit 
of ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ owing to the operation of Section 3J 
of the NHAI Act.
b)	
Limiting the judgment to prospective application would result in 
hostile discrimination, as landowners in Chakrapani (supra), 
Tarsem Singh (supra), and similar cases have benefited from 
the declaration of Section 3J of the NHAI Act as unconstitutional. 
Conversely, other similarly situated landowners would be 
deprived of the same relief, leading to inequality that undermines 
the essence of Article 14 of the Constitution.
c)	
The instant Application seeking clarification represents a second 
attempt to evade impending liability. This Court, in Tarsem 
Singh (supra), has already addressed the precedent set in 
Sunita Mehra (supra), unequivocally holding that the benefit 
of ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ must be extended to all cases arising 
between 1997 and 2015, based on the categorical admission 
by the Union of India itself. 
d)	
The clarification sought through this Application, if entertained, 
would effectively amount to a review of the decision in Tarsem 
Singh (supra). It would also enable the Government to withdraw 
from its previously stated position, wherein it had agreed to 
extend the benefit of ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’. 
C.	
Issues
15.	 As previously elaborated, the singular issue prompting filing of the 
instant Application is to determine definitively whether the judgment 
384
in Tarsem Singh (supra) is applicable prospectively or extends 
retrospectively.
D.	
Analysis
16.	 At the outset, it is essential to briefly refer to the ratio espoused in 
Tarsem Singh (supra), which, after considering the relevant facts, 
applicable laws, and precedents, held that Section 3J of the NHAI 
Act, by excluding the applicability of the 1894 Act and thereby denying 
‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ for lands acquired under the NHAI Act, is 
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. To this end, the decision 
in Tarsem Singh (supra) took notice of the eleven grounds raised 
on behalf of the NHAI and the Union of India, and dealt with those 
grounds by segregating the appeals therein into eleven groups and 
outlining them in seriatim.
17.	 Regardless, the prayer in the instant Application expressly seeks 
clarification that the decision in Tarsem Singh (supra) should be 
deemed to operate prospectively only. However, in our considered 
view, granting such a clarification would effectively nullify the very relief 
that Tarsem Singh (supra) intended to provide, as the prospective 
operation of it would restore the state of affairs to the same position 
as it was before the decision was rendered. 
18.	 We say so for the reason that the broader purpose behind Tarsem 
Singh (supra) was to resolve and put quietus upon the quagmire 
created by Section 3J of the NHAI Act, which led to the unequal 
treatment of similarly situated individuals. The impact of Section 
3J was short-lived, owing to the applicability of the 2013 Act upon 
the NHAI Act from the date of 01.01.2015. As a result, two classes 
of landowners emerged, devoid of any intelligible differentia: those 
whose lands were acquired by the NHAI between 1997 and 2015, 
and those whose lands were acquired otherwise. 
19.	 This must be viewed in the light of the principle that when a provision 
is declared unconstitutional, any continued disparity strikes at the core 
of Article 14 and must be rectified, particularly when such disparity 
affects only a select group. To illustrate, rendering the decision in 
Tarsem Singh (supra) as prospective would create a situation where 
a landowner whose land was acquired on 31.12.2014 would be 
denied the benefit of ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’, whereas a landowner 
whose land was acquired the very next day, 01.01.2015—the date 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
385
Union of India & Ors. v. Tarsem Singh & Ors.
on which the Ordinance was promulgated, to read the 2013 Act into 
the NHAI Act, would be entitled to these statutory benefits. 
20.	 Be that as it may, even if we were to assume that the decision in 
Tarsem Singh (supra) suffers from the vice of vagueness, the 
absence of a judicial directive or an explicit legislative mandate 
should not result in the creation of an artificial classification among 
a homogeneous group by the same State exercising powers under 
the same Statute. In this specific instance, the landowners have no 
discretion or choice regarding the date of land acquisition or the 
surrender of possession. Thus, both equity and equality demand 
that no such discrimination be permitted, as allowing it would be 
unjust. 
21.	 That being so, the decision in Tarsem Singh (supra) also cannot 
be assailed on the grounds that it opens a Pandora’s Box or 
contravenes the doctrine of immutability, as it merely allows for 
the grant of ‘solatium’ or ‘interest’, which are inherently embedded 
as compensatory benefits under an expropriating legislation. This 
exercise cannot be equated to reopening of cases or revisiting the 
decisions that have already attained finality. Similarly, the restoration 
of these twin benefits does not invite reconsideration of the merits 
of a decided case, re-evaluation of the compensation amount, or 
potentially declaring the acquisition process itself to be unlawful. 
Instead, the ultimate outcome of Tarsem Singh (supra) is limited 
to granting ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ to aggrieved landowners whose 
lands were acquired by NHAI between 1997 and 2015. It does not, 
in any manner, direct the reopening of cases that have already 
attained finality. 
22.	 On the contrary, modifying or clarifying the judgment in Tarsem Singh 
(supra) would lend itself to violating the doctrine of immutability, 
undermining the finality of the decision. In fact, what the Applicant 
seeks to achieve, indirectly, is to evade responsibility and further 
delay the resolution of a settled issue where the directions given are 
unequivocal—Quando aliquid prohibetur ex directo, prohibetur et per 
obliquum i.e. ‘what cannot be done directly should also not be done 
indirectly’. This Court has, on several occasions, disapproved of the 
practice of filing Miscellaneous Applications as a strategic litigation 
tactic aimed at neutralising judicial decisions and seeking a second 
opportunity for relief. 
386
23.	 In all fairness, the only defense that may perhaps seem appealing 
is the claim of a financial burden amounting to Rupees 100 crores. 
However, this argument does not persuade us for several reasons: 
First, if this burden has been borne by the NHAI in the case of 
thousands of other landowners, it stands to reason that it should 
also be shared by the NHAI in this instance, in order to eliminate 
discrimination. Second, the financial burden of acquiring land cannot 
be justified in the light of the Constitutional mandate of Article 300A. 
Third, since most National Highways are being developed under the 
Public Private Partnership model, the financial burden will ultimately 
be passed on to the relevant Project Proponent. Fourth, even the 
Project Proponent would not have to bear the compensation costs 
out of pocket, as it is the commuters who will bear the actual brunt 
of this cost. Ultimately, the burden is likely to be saddled onto the 
middle or upper-middle-class segment of society, particularly those 
who can afford private vehicles or operate commercial ventures. 
We are thus not inclined to entertain the plea for prospectivity on 
this limited tenet. 
24.	 Lastly, as regards the decision in Sunita Mehra (supra), which 
is claimed to have prohibited the grant of ‘solatium’ or ‘interest’ 
in concluded cases, we find that this position has already been 
addressed and clarified in Tarsem Singh (supra). Given that the 
Government, through the then Solicitor General, had conceded 
this issue at that time, it cannot now retract its stance and seek to 
reargue the same bone of contention. Hence, this assertion too, 
stands rejected.
E.	
Conclusion
25.	 In view of the foregoing analysis, we find no merit in the contentions 
raised by the Applicant, NHAI. We reaffirm the principles established 
in Tarsem Singh (supra) regarding the beneficial nature of granting 
‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ while emphasising the need to avoid creating 
unjust classifications lacking intelligible differentia. Consequently, we 
deem it appropriate to dismiss the present Miscellaneous Application. 
26.	 Leave is granted in the other connected matters, and all the appeals 
are disposed of with a direction to the Competent Authority to 
calculate the amount of ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ in accordance with 
the directions issued in Tarsem Singh (supra). In this context, the 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
387
Union of India & Ors. v. Tarsem Singh & Ors.
appeal arising out of SLP (C) Diary No. 52538/2023 is dismissed, as 
the challenge therein pertains to the High Court’s refusal to award 
Additional Market Value as another component of the compensation, 
while ‘solatium’ and ‘interest’ have already been granted. 
27.	 Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of in the above terms. 
Ordered accordingly.
Result of the case: Miscellaneous Application dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan