[2025] 1 S.C.R. 130 : 2025 INSC 11
The State, Central Bureau of Investigation 
v. 
A. Satish Kumar & Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 898 of 2024)
02 January 2025
[C.T. Ravikumar* and Rajesh Bindal, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Merely because a Central Government employee works within the 
territory of a particular State, whether the CBI requires consent 
from the concerned State Government to register an FIR against 
such Central Government employee in connection with commission 
of an offence under a Central Act; whether the High Court was 
justified in quashing the FIRs and the subsequent proceedings 
against the respondents holding that the same were vitiated in 
view of the lack of consent and the lack of notification for a Special 
Court under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
Headnotes†
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 – ss.6, 
5  –  Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 – ss.7, 4 – Andhra 
Pradesh Re-Organisation Act, 2014 – s.3 – FIRs under s.7, PC Act 
were registered against the respondents, Central Government 
employees working in the State of Andhra Pradesh – FIRs and 
subsequent proceedings were challenged contending that after 
the bifurcation of the State of Andhra Pradesh into the State 
of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh, for the CBI to 
register and investigate FIR within the newly formed State of 
Andhra Pradesh, consent of the Government of Andra Pradesh 
was necessary as per the DSPE Act – High Court quashed the 
FIRs and the subsequent proceedings – Sustainability:
Held: Not sustainable – Much prior to the bifurcation of the State 
of Andhra Pradesh into two States in 2014, the Government of 
erstwhile undivided State of Andhra Pradesh vide order dated 
14.05.1990, gave general consent for investigation by the CBI in 
the entire State of Andhra Pradesh – In continuation thereof, the 
general consent of Government of Andhra Pradesh to exercise 
* Author
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
131
The State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. 
A. Satish Kumar & Ors.
powers and jurisdiction under the DSPE Act was accorded, rather, 
extended within the limits of Andhra Pradesh as per subsequent 
Govt. orders of 2014, 206, 2017 and 2018 – There cannot be 
any doubt w.r.t the fact that under such Govt. orders according 
general consent to exercise the powers and jurisdiction under 
DSPE Act against private persons for alleged offences whether 
acting separately or in conjunction with Central Govt./undertaking 
employees and State Govt. employees upto first gazetted level, to 
all members of DSPE – This cannot mean that employees of the 
Central Government/ Central Government undertaking and State 
Government employees up to first gazetted level are beyond the 
reach of the CBI and only private persons acting separately or 
in conjunction with such categories of employees alone can be 
proceeded against – Respondents were Central Govt. employees/
Central Govt. Undertaking employees and allegedly committed 
serious offence under PC Act, a Central Act – Furthermore, the 
1963 Resolution of Ministry of Home Affairs establishing the CBI 
provides its function in cases where public servants under the control 
of the Central Government are involved either themselves or with 
the State Government servants and/or other person – Impugned 
judgment set aside – FIRs restored. [Paras 5, 21, 28, 30]
Andhra Pradesh Re-Organisation Act, 2014 – Prevention 
of Corruption Act, 1988 – ss.4, 7 – FIRs in question were 
challenged by the respondents on the ground that they were 
registered by the CBI, ACB, Hyderabad in Telangana whereas 
the alleged offence in the FIRs had taken place in Kurnool 
and Ananthapur districts which were and still, within the 
State of Andhra Pradesh after bifurcation and that the Court 
at Hyderabad lacked jurisdiction to entertain the cases – 
Laws applicable to the undivided State of Andhra Pradesh, if 
continued to apply to the new States of Telangana and Andhra 
Pradesh despite bifurcation:
Held: Yes – High Court erred in holding that there was no 
notification issued conferring the status of Special Court in terms 
of Section 4 of the PC Act to the CBI Court, Hyderabad – Even 
according to the High Court, GOMS dt. 07.08.2012 issued by the 
State of Andhra Pradesh, CBI Court at Hyderabad was given the 
power to exercise jurisdiction over Rayalaseema districts of Andhra 
Pradesh, namely, Chittoor, Anantpur, Kadappa and Kurnool to try 
cases registered under the PC Act and this continued thereafter 
132
by subsequently issued Govt. orders – In view of the impact of 
para 2(f) and clauses (i) to (ii) under para 6, such notification or 
circulars which were in force prior to the bifurcation or modified 
subsequently, in the absence of repeal or amendment as relates 
the subject matter involved thereunder within the limits of State of 
Telangana should be presumed to exist within the limits of State of 
Telangana – Thus, the finding of the High Court that all such ‘laws’ 
pertain only to the State of Andhra Pradesh is not correct and the 
legal fiction should be that such laws would be in force in the new 
State unless altered or repealed or amended by it, in accordance 
with law – Thus, the terms of the provisions under circular memo 
dated 26.05.2014, all “laws” applicable to the undivided State of 
Andhra Pradesh on 01.06.2014 would continue to apply to the 
new States, i.e., the State of Telangana and the State of Andhra 
Pradesh despite the bifurcation of the erstwhile State of Andhra 
Pradesh till such time they were altered, repealed or amended. 
[Paras 21, 22]
Case Law Cited
Kanwal Tanuj v. State of Bihar and Ors., 2020 INSC 357 : 2020 
SCC OnLine SC 395; Fertico Marketing and Investment Private 
Limited and Ors. v. Central Bureau of Investigation and Anr. [2020] 
12 SCR 956 : (2021) 2 SCC 525 – relied on.
State of Punjab and Others v. Balbir Singh & Ors. [1976] 2 SCR 
115 : (1976) 3 SCC 242; C.B.I., A.H.D., Patna v. Braj Bhushan 
Prasad [2001] Supp. 3 SCR 627 : (2001) 9 SCC 432; Commissioner 
of Commercial Taxes, Ranchi and Ors. v. Swarn Rekha Cokes 
and Coals (P) Ltd. and Ors. [2004] Supp. 2 SCR 633 : (2004) 6 
SCC 689 – referred to.
List of Acts
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946; Andhra Pradesh 
Re-Organisation Act, 2014; Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
List of Keywords
DSPE Act; General consent for investigation by the CBI; General 
consent to exercise the powers and jurisdiction under DSPE Act; 
Bifurcation of the State of Andhra Pradesh; Erstwhile undivided 
State of Andhra Pradesh; State of Telangana; New States; Consent 
from the concerned State Government; Commission of offence 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
133
The State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. 
A. Satish Kumar & Ors.
under a Central Act; Lack of consent; Employees of the Central 
Government/Central Government undertaking; CBI; Policy division 
order; Territorial  jurisdiction of CBI; Government orders; CBI Court; 
Special Court; Lack of notification for a Special Court; FIR; Further 
proceedings; Quashing; Special Court in terms of Section 4 of the 
PC Act; Repealed; Amended; Altered; ‘law’.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
898 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 13.04.2023 of the High Court 
of Andhra Pradesh at Amravati in WP No. 26990 of 2021
With
Criminal Appeal No. 899 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
K.M. Natraj, S.V. Raju, A.S.Gs., Mukesh Kumar Maroria, Vatsal 
Joshi, Ms. Sairica Raju, Shantanu Sharma, Zoheb Hussain, Sanjay 
Kr. Tyagi, Annam Venkatesh, S.S. Rebello, Sanjay Kumar Tyagi, 
Anirudh Sharma-ii, Advs. for the Appellant.
Ms. Mary Mitzy, B Ravikiran Singh, Oleander D Singh, Ashutosh 
Gupta, Ashutosh Jha, D. Bharat Kumar, Aman Shukla, Amit Kumar, 
Ms. Ekta Swarup, Gopal Jha, Mahfooz Ahsan Nazki, Polanki 
Gowtham, Ms. Rajeswari Mukherjee, K V Girish Chowdary, T Vijaya 
Bhaskar Reddy, Ms. Archita Nigam, Meeran Maqbool, Advs. for 
the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
C.T. Ravikumar, J.
1.	
The self-same appellant, namely, the Central Bureau of Investigation 
(for short, ‘the CBI’) calls in question the common judgment dated 
13.04.2023 in W.P. Nos.26990 of 2021 and 5441 of 2022 passed by 
the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. Writ Petition No.26990 of 2021 
was filed by the first respondent in the former appeal and Writ Petition 
134
No.5441 of 2022 was filed by the first respondent in the latter appeal. 
As observed by the High Court in the impugned common judgment, 
common question(s) of law arose for consideration in both the cases 
in identical circumstances and the High Court took W.P. No.26990 of 
2022 as the lead case. Consequent to the consideration of the legal 
and factual position, the High Court allowed the said Writ Petition 
and for the same reasoning allowed W.P. No.5441 of 2022 as per 
the impugned common judgment.
2.	
Before dealing with the precise question(s) of law involved in the 
captioned appeals, it is appropriate to refer, succinctly, to the factual 
background that ultimately led to the filing of the Writ Petitions and 
their culmination in the impugned common judgment, as under:-
FIR No.10 (A)/2017 was registered for offences under Section 7 of 
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (for short, ‘the PC Act’) against 
the first respondent in Criminal Appeal No.898 of 2024 while he 
was working as Superintendent, Central Excise, Nandyal, (Kurnool), 
District in the State of Andhra Pradesh. The allegation was that he 
demanded and accepted an illegal gratification of ₹10,000/- from the 
original complainant, Sri. Arif, who was a contractor, on 09.05.2017 
for issuance of licence surrender certificate qua Excise Registration 
Certificate No. AHC PC 1141 KEM 001. 
3.	
In the latter appeal, against the first respondent therein, FIR 
No.RC22(A)/2017-CBI/HYD was registered under Section 7 of the PC 
Act. The allegation was that while working as Accounts Assistant in 
the office of Senior Divisional Financial Manager, Guntakal, by abusing 
his office as public servant he demanded and obtained ₹15,000/- as 
illegal gratification from the original complainant therein, Sri. C. Dorrai 
Rajulu Naidu on 20.11.2017 for doing official favour of processing 
contract bills for the months of July, 2017 to September, 2017 and 
also previously sanctioned bills for the month of March to May, 2017 
and June, 2017. In both the cases, after completion of investigation, 
chargesheets were filed before the Court of Principal, Special Judge 
for CBI Cases, Hyderabad. In the case of former appeal, it was so filed 
on 28.12.2017 and in the latter case it was so filed on 29.03.2018. 
The Court took cognizance, in the former case, on 16.07.2018 and 
took on it file as CC No.2/2018 and in the latter case, on taking 
cognizance it was taken on file as CC No.6/2018 on 03.08.2018. On 
28.03.2019, the CBI, policy division order, redefining the territorial 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
135
The State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. 
A. Satish Kumar & Ors.
jurisdiction of CBI, ACB, Hyderabad and Vishakhapatnam branches 
was issued. On 03.09.2019, the High Court of Telangana vide ROC 
No.334/E-1/2008 issued a notification regarding the jurisdiction of 
four Rayalaseema Districts of the State of Andhra Pradesh, namely, 
Kurnool, Kadappa, Chittoor and Ananthapurand for their inclusion in 
the jurisdiction of CBI Courts Vishakhapatnam by deleting the same 
from the jurisdiction of CBI Courts at Hyderabad.
4.	
Earlier, as per the Andhra Pradesh Re-Organisation Act, 2014 (for 
short, ‘the A.P. Re-Organisation Act’), w.e.f. 02.06.2014, the State 
of Andhra Pradesh was bifurcated geographically into two States 
namely, the State of Andhra Pradesh and the State of Telangana. 
Indisputably, despite the birth of two States by such bifurcation the 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh continued to be the common High 
Court for States i.e., Andhra Pradesh and Telangana till December, 
2018. As relates the causative incident which led to the registration 
of the FIR No.10(A)/2017 against the first respondent in the former 
appeal, it occurred within the limits of Kurnool District and that of FIR 
No.RC22(A)/2017-CBI/HYD it occurred within the limits of Ananthapur, 
both were in the State of Andhra Pradesh. Even after the bifurcation 
those districts remained with the State of Andhra Pradesh. As noticed 
earlier, both the aforesaid FIRs were registered for offences under 
Section 7 of the PC Act at Hyderabad in Telangana State by the CBI, 
ACB Hyderabad and on completion of investigation the CBI filed final 
reports before the Court of Principal, Special Judge for CBI cases, 
Hyderabad and that Court took cognizance of offences based on 
such final reports and took them on file and assigned CC Nos.2/2018 
and 6/2018 respectively. As noted earlier, ROC Nos.334/E-1/2008 
dated 03.09.2019 was issued by the High Court of Telangana, on 
its administrative side, directing to transfer the CBI cases pertaining 
to the districts of Kurnool, Kadappa, Chittoor and Ananthapur of 
Rayalaseema region of Andhra Pradesh to the Court of Special 
Judge for CBI cases at Vishakhapatnam. Accordingly, those cases 
were transferred and re-numbered respectively as CC No.35/2020 
and CC No.37/2020. Still, later as per GOMS No.9 & 10 Law (LA, LA 
& J-Home Court A) Department dated 09.01.2020, IIndSpecial Judge 
for CBI Cases, Vishakhapatnam was shifted from Vishakhapatnam 
to Kurnool. Consequently, CC No.35/2020 was re-numbered as CC 
No.13 of 2022 and CC No.37/2020 was re-numbered as CC No.15 
of 2022, on the files of the Court of Special Judge for CBI Cases, 
136
Kurnool. It is in the aforesaid circumstances that the respective first 
respondent in the captioned appeals who were the respective accused 
in CC No.13 of 2022 and CC No.15/2022 moved the aforementioned 
Writ Petitions which culminated in the impugned common judgment 
dated 13.04.2023.
5.	
Much prior to the bifurcation of the State of Andhra Pradesh into two 
States, as above,the Government of erstwhile undivided State of 
Andhra Pradesh vide order dated 14.05.1990, gave general consent 
for investigation by the CBI in the entire State of Andhra Pradesh. 
Going by the said notification, general consent was accorded under 
Section 6 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (for 
short, ‘the DSPE Act’) to exercise powers and jurisdiction under the 
said Act in the entire State of Andhra Pradesh for investigation of 
the offences mentioned thereunder. We will dilate on its impact and 
effect a little later.
6.	
Writ Petition No.26990 of 2021 was filed by the first respondent in the 
former appeal mainly seeking to issue a writ order or direction, more 
particularly, one in the nature of Writ of Mandamus by declaring the 
action of conducting trial in CC No.35 of 2020 (later got the number 
of the case as CC No.13/2022), pending on the files of the Court of 
IInd Additional Special Judge for CBI Cases, Vishakhapatnam as illegal 
and to quash the same, raising various grounds. It was contended that 
the A.P. Re-Organisation Act was passed in 2014 and on 02.06.2014 
viz., the appointed day, two States were created by bifurcating the 
erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh, namely, State of Andhra Pradesh 
and the State of Telangana and, in the said circumstances, for the CBI 
to register and investigate FIR Nos.10(A)/2017 and RC22(A)/2017-
CBI/HYD within the limits of the newly formed State of Andhra 
Pradesh, permission from the Government of Andra Pradesh was 
necessary as per the provisions of the ‘DSPE Act’. It was further 
contended that the subject FIRs were registered by the CBI, ACB, 
Hyderabad in Telangana whereas the alleged offence in those FIRs 
had taken place in Kurnool and Ananthapur districts which were and 
still, within the State of Andhra Pradesh, and further that on the dates 
of registration of those FIRs there was no express permission as 
required under Section 6 of the DSPE Act to register them and also 
to investigate the same. Based on such grounds, it was contended 
that the entire investigation and the filing of the charge sheet are 
vitiated and further that the Court at Hyderabad lacks jurisdiction to 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
137
The State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. 
A. Satish Kumar & Ors.
entertain the cases. Furthermore, it was contended that under the 
PC Act, a specific notification was to be issued either by the State 
or by the Central Government designating a Judge to try offences 
thereunder and only the Special Judge could try offences under the 
PC Act cases. It was also the contention of the Writ Petitioner/the 
first respondent that till December 2017, the Government of Andhra 
Pradesh did not accord consent for prosecution of Central Government 
servants under the provisions of the PC Act and therefore, Special 
Court for CBI Cases, Hyderabad could not have entertained the 
aforesaid case against him. So also, for the same reasons neither 
CBI Court nor the High Court had jurisdiction to transfer the cases 
to the CBI Court, Vishakhapatnam. The subsequent events could 
not cure the inherent lack of jurisdiction and as such, the entire 
proceedings got vitiated, it was further submitted.
7.	
Obviously, the same contentions, with necessary factual changes, 
were made on behalf of the first respondent in the latter appeal, 
who was the accused in CC No.15/2022, in Writ Petition No.5441 
of 2022 to support the prayer to quash CC No.15/2022 and all 
further proceedings thereof. The appellant herein who was one of 
the respondents therein, strongly resisted the contentions regarding 
inherent lack of jurisdiction and contended that the proceedings did 
not get vitiated as contended by the Writ Petitioners.
8.	
A scrutiny of the impugned judgment would reveal that the High 
Court upon reviewing the sequence of events held that the transfer 
of cases from the Additional CBI Court, Vishakhapatnam to Kurnool 
is not per se wrong and, in fact, it is in accordance with law. We may 
hasten to add here that the said finding is not under challenge before 
us, certainly, at the instance of the first respondent in the captioned 
appeals and hence, the same need not be considered any further. But 
then, even after holding thus, the High Court went on to consider the 
questions whether the lack of consent as also the lack of notification 
for a Special Court under the PC Act would go into the root of the 
matter and thereby vitiate the proceedings. Both the questions were 
answered in the affirmative and accordingly WP No.26990 of 2021 as 
also WP No.5441/2022 were allowed. Resultantly, the registration of 
the respective FIR and filing of the chargesheetswere held as vitiated 
for the absence of consent from the State of Telangana to the CBI, 
to register the FIRs and conduct investigation. It is aggrieved by 
the quashment of such proceedings viz., registration of FIR, filing 
138
of charge sheet and all further proceedings involved in CC No.13 
of 2022 and CC No.37 of 2020 (now CC No.15/2022) as per the 
impugned common judgment that the appellant herein preferred the 
captioned appeals. 
9.	
Heard Shri M. Nataraj, learned Additional Solicitor General for the 
appellant and the learned counsel for the respondents. 
10.	 The learned Additional Solicitor General would contend that the 
impugned common judgment of the High Court is unsustainable and 
liable to be interfered with, for its failure to take into consideration 
various crucial factors in their true perspective. It is, inter alia, 
contended that Circular Memo No.13665/SR/2014 dated 26.05.2014 
was not properly considered and appreciated appropriately. It is 
submitted that the Circular Memo dated 26.05.2014 would clarify the 
position that all ‘laws’ applicable to the undivided State of Andhra 
Pradesh as on 01.06.2014 would continue to apply to the newly 
created States due to bifurcation, namely, the State of Telangana and 
the State of Andhra Pradesh w.e.f. 02.06.2014, despite the bifurcation 
of the erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh till altered, repealed or 
amended. It is also the contention that even after bifurcation of 
Andhra Pradesh, the S.P., CBI, Hyderabad and office of S.P. CBI 
Hyderabad were not deprived of their identity as ‘Special Police 
Force’ and to drive home the point the learned Additional Solicitor 
General, relied on the decision of this Court in State of Punjab 
and Others v. Balbir Singh& Ors.1 It is also contended that the 
High Court had failed to appreciate the fact that as on the date of 
the registration of the FIR involved in the captioned appeals there 
was consent to CBI in terms of the provisions of the Section 6 of 
the DSPE Act. It is furthermore contended that the High Court had 
gone wrong in holding that G.O.M.S. Nos.158 dated 28.11.2014, 67 
dated 01.06.2016, No.168 dated 05.12.2017 and dated 03.08.2018 
extending the general consent as orders pertaining to the State of 
Andhra Pradesh only. 
11.	 The learned counsel appearing for the first respondent in the appeals 
stoutly resisted the contentions raised on behalf of the appellant 
and submitted that the entire sequence of events including the 
trapping, registration of the FIRs, filing of the chargesheets and 
1	
1975 INSC 238 : [1976] 2 SCR 115 : (1976) 3 SCC 242
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
139
The State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. 
A. Satish Kumar & Ors.
taking cognizance etc. were considered by the High Court ultimately 
to arrive at the conclusion that the registration of the FIRs as also 
filing of the chargesheets in the cases on hand, are vitiated by law. 
It is further submitted that since such irregularities would go into the 
root of the matter denude jurisdiction. Hence, the High Court was 
right in quashing the respective FIRs and all further proceedings in 
pursuance thereof. 
12.	 Before considering the rival contentions to examine their tenability it is 
only appropriate to scan the impugned judgment to find out the reasons 
specifically assigned by the High Court in coming to the conclusion 
that the registration of the FIR and the filing of the chargesheet in the 
cases on hand are vitiated in law. Such a consideration would reveal 
that the High Court considered the questions as to whether CBI had 
power to register the FIRs and investigate offences qua respondent 
No.1 in the appeals, whether the FIR for offences under the PC Act 
could be registered in Hyderabad in the State of Telangana when 
the offences alleged to have been committed at places within the 
State of Andhra Pradesh and for that reason whether the CBI Court 
in the State of Telangana got jurisdiction to try the offence under the 
PC Act in respect of offences allegedly committed at places falling 
within the State of Andhra Pradesh.
13.	 Obviously, the High Court interpreted Section 4 of the PC Act and 
the decision of this Court in C.B.I., A.H.D., Patna v. Braj Bhushan 
Prasad,2 and such other cases to come to the conclusion that 
the Court of the Special Judge for CBI cases, Hyderabad got no 
jurisdiction to try the offences involved in the cases on hand under 
the provisions of the PC Act. The High Court has also arrived at 
the conclusion that there was no consent required in terms of the 
provisions under Section 6 of the DSPE Act to register and investigate 
the offences against the Central Government employees on the date 
of registration of the FIR in the cases on hand.
14.	 The impugned judgment would reveal that the High Court firstly 
considered the power of the CBI sans consent of the Government 
of Andhra Pradesh to register FIR on the date(s) of registration of 
the subject FIRs and further to investigate them. After referring to 
2	
2001 INSC 485 : [2001] Supp. 3 SCR 627 : (2001) 9 SCC 432
140
Section 5 and 6 of the DSPE Act, it was held that they would make 
it clear that though under Section 5 the Central Government could 
extend the area of operation of the said Act in a State it would 
be subject to the consent of the State Government concerned. 
To fortify the said view the High Court referred to and relied on 
the decision of this Court in Fertico Marketing and Investment 
Private Limited and Ors. v. Central Bureau of Investigation and 
Anr.3 The High Court also took note of the fact that in the cases on 
hand the causative incident that led to the registration of the FIRs 
occurred in districts, Kurnool and Anantpur respectively, within the 
State of Andhra Pradesh. The Court has also taken note of the fact 
that investigation was conducted by the CBI and chargesheets were 
submitted thereafter in the Special Court for CBI Cases at Hyderabad 
and thereafter, that Court took cognizance of the offence(s). Whether 
such actions are legal or of the nature which would go into the root 
of the matter to vitiate the proceedings, were considered taking note 
of various factors and facts. The High Court considered the facts 
that the A.P. Reorganisation Act came into force on 02.06.2014 and 
thereafter, general consent was given only by the State of Andhra 
Pradesh as per GOMS No.158 dated 28.11.2014 and then by GOMS 
No.67 dated 01.06.2016 and yet again by GOMS No.184 dated 
05.12.2017 and 109 dated 03.08.2018 to come to the conclusion 
that as on the date(s) of registration of the subject FIRs there was 
no power vested with the CBI, ACB, Hyderabad in Telangana to 
register crime in regard to the offence taken place in Kurnool as also 
in Anantapur in the State of Andhra Pradesh and also to conduct 
investigation thereon. It is also evident that the High Court arrived 
at the conclusion that GOMS 88 dated 07.08.2012 by which CBI 
Court at Hyderabad was given the power to exercise jurisdiction 
over the districts in Telangana as also Rayalaseema Districts of 
Andhra Pradesh namely, Chittoor, Ananthapur, Kadappa and Kurnool 
ceased to be in force after the State Reorganisation Act came into 
force on 02.06.2014 and therefore, the Court of the Special Judge 
for CBI Cases, Hyderabad ceased to have jurisdiction to deal with 
the cases under the PC Act in respect of the aforementioned four 
districts falling within the Rayalaseema regions of State of Andhra 
3	
2020 INSC 645 : [2020] 12 SCR 956 : (2021) 2 SCC 525
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
141
The State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. 
A. Satish Kumar & Ors.
Pradesh. It was also held that in such circumstances the Court of 
Special Judge for CBI Cases, Hyderabad could not have entertained 
the cases after 02.06.2014 as the required notification under the PC 
Act was not issued subsequent to 02.06.2014, the appointed day 
under the A.P. Reorganisation Act.
15.	 Having gone through the reasons that made the High Court to 
come to such conclusions as mentioned and to quash the subject 
FIRs and the subsequent proceedings thereon, we will consider 
the contentions raised to mount attack against the same. As noted 
hereinbefore, the core contention of the appellant is that the High 
Court had failed to consider Circular Memo No.13665/SR/2014 dated 
26.05.2014 and its true import. Indeed, the said circular was issued 
in terms of Section 3 of the A.P. Reorganisation Act. Para 2 of the 
said circular reads thus:-
“2. In this connection, it 1s stated that “law” as defined in 
section 2(f) of the Act is as follows :-
(f) ‘law’ includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, 
order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument 
having, immediately before the appointed day, the force 
of law in the whole or in any part of the existing State of 
Andhra Pradesh”
16.	 Clauses (i) to (iii) of Paragraph 6 of the said circular are also relevant 
in the circumstances and they read thus:
“(i) all the laws, which were applicable to the undivided 
State of Andhra Pradesh, as on 1-6-2014, would continue 
to apply to the new States i.e., State of Telangana and 
State of Andhra Pradesh created Dy the Central Act, with 
effect from 2-6-2014 notwithstanding the bifurcation of the 
erstwhile Pradesh;
(ii) to facilitate their application in respect of the State 
of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh, the 
appropriate Government may, before the expiration of 
two years from 2-6-2014, by order, make such adaptions 
and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal 
or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and 
thereupon,
142
(iii) every such law as adapted or modified as above, will 
continue till such time it altered, repealed or amended by 
a competent Legislature or other competent authority, in 
the respective State.”
17.	 In contextual situation it is relevant to refer to the decision of this 
Court in Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Ranchi and Ors. 
v. Swarn Rekha Cokes and Coals (P) Ltd. and Ors.4 This Court 
was considering the question of continuity of laws in force in the 
erstwhile State in the new States carved out of erstwhile State with 
reference to the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000. It was held that 
States reorganisation legislations must be construed in the light of 
the unusual situation created by the creation of a new State and 
the object sought to be achieved. It was held therein further that the 
laws which were applicable to the undivided State of Bihar would 
continue to apply to the new States created by the Act and that the 
laws that operated would continue to operate notwithstanding the 
bifurcation of the erstwhile State of Bihar and creation of the new 
State of Jharkhand. They would continue in force until and unless 
altered, repealed or amended, it was further held.
18.	 It is in the light of the ratio of the aforesaid decision and the wide 
definition given to the term ‘law’ under paragraph 2 of the circular 
dated 26.05.2014 issued under Section 3 of the AP Reorganisation 
Act, that the effect of GOMS No.88 dated 07.08.2012 and such 
other Government orders or other instruments in force and brought 
into force, have to be looked into while considering the questions 
involved in instant cases. In terms of Sections 3 and 4 of the PC Act 
only a Special Judge designated as such by notification, by a State 
or Central Government would have the power to entertain cases 
under the provisions of the PC Act. Indisputably, as per GOMS No.88 
dated 07.08.2012 the erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh notified the 
CBI Court at Hyderabad to exercise jurisdiction over the districts in 
Telangana as also in Rayalaseema Districts of AP namely, Chittoor, 
Anandpur, Kadappa, and Kurnool to try offences under the PC 
Act. The effect of the said GO dated 07.08.2012 and some other 
Government orders, hereinafter to be referred, have to be looked 
into in the light of Circular Memo dated 26.05.2014, as stated earlier.
4	
2004 INSC 378 : [2004] Supp. 2 SCR 633 : (2004) 6 SCC 689
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
143
The State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. 
A. Satish Kumar & Ors.
19.	 The term ‘law’ was defined in para 2(f) of the Circular Memo dated 
26.05.2014. The said definition, as extracted above, would reveal 
that it would take in any order, bye-law, scheme, notification, or any 
other instrument having immediately before the appointed day viz., 
02.06.2014, the force of law in the whole or in any part of the existing 
State of Andhra Pradesh. Thus, the cumulative effect of para 2(f), 
clauses (i) to (iii) of para 6 of the said Circular dated 26.05.2014 as 
also other notifications issued prior to 02.06.2014 or in modification 
of the then existing law(s), as it is to be understood in terms of the 
definition in para 2(f), especially, in the absence of repeal or alteration 
or amendment in the State of Telangana also have to be looked into 
while considering the question(s) involved in the cases on hand.
20.	 Now, we will refer to GORT No.1247, Home (SC.A Department) 
dated 14.05.1990 whereunder general consent for investigation by 
the CBI in the entire State of Andhra Pradesh was accorded under 
Section 6 of the DSPE Act to exercise powers and jurisdiction under 
the said Act. It, in so far as relevant, reads thus:-
“Under Section-6 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment 
Act, 1946 (Central Act XXV of 1946), the Governor of 
Andhra Pradesh hereby accord general consent to all 
the members of Delhi Special/ Establishment to / Police 
exercise the powers and jurisdiction under the said act 
in the State of Andhra Pradesh for investigation of the 
offences mentioned hereunder against (i) Private Persons 
for alleged offences committed whether acting separately 
or in conjunction with Central Government/undertaking 
employees and in case of State Govt. employees upto First 
Gazetted level when acting along with or in conjunction 
with private persons or Central Govt. employees. However, 
in case of State Government employees from 2nd level 
gazetted posts sitting or former legislators, Members of 
Parliament and Members of Legislative Assembly (even 
Ministers, Chairmen of Corporation etc.) the CBI shall 
obtain prior consent of the State Government in each case”.
21.	 In continuation of the GORT No.1247, Home (SC.A Department) 
dated 14.05.1990, the general consent of Government of Andhra 
Pradesh to exercise powers and jurisdiction under the DSPE Act was 
accorded, rather, extended as per subsequent Govt. orders such as 
144
GOMS No.477, Home, “SC.A Department” dated 18.06.1994, GOMS 
No.158, Home, “SC.A Department” dated 28.11.2014, GOMS No.67, 
Home, “SC.A Department” dated 01.06.2016, GOMS No.184,Home, 
“SC.A Department” dated 05.12.2017 and GOMS No.109 Home, 
“SC.A Department” dated 03.08.2018. Obviously, under the said 
Government orders the order granting general consent as has been 
mentioned in 14.05.1990 was extended within the limits of Andhra 
Pradesh. There cannot be any doubt with respect to the fact that 
under such Govt. orders according general consent to exercise the 
powers and jurisdiction under DSPE Act against private persons for 
alleged offences whether acting separately or in conjunction with 
Central Govt./undertaking employees and State Govt. employees 
upto first gazetted level, to all members of DSPE. This cannot be 
construed or understood to mean that employees of the Central 
Government/Central Government undertaking and State Government 
employees up to first gazetted level are beyond the reach of the CBI 
and only private persons acting separately or in conjunction with such 
categories of employees alone can be proceeded against. It is also 
to be noted that even according to the High Court in the impugned 
judgment, GOMS dt. 07.08.2012 issued by the State of Andhra 
Pradesh CBI Court at Hyderabad was given the power to exercise 
jurisdiction over Rayalaseema districts of Andhra Pradesh, namely, 
Chittoor, Anantpur, Kadappa and Kurnool to try cases registered 
under the PC Act and the said provision continued thereafter by 
subsequently issued Govt. orders. In view of the impact of para 2(f) 
and clauses (i) to (ii) under para 6 such notification or circulars which 
were in force prior to the bifurcation or modified subsequently, in 
the absence of repeal or amendment as relates the subject matter 
involved thereunder within the limits of State of Telangana should 
be presumed to exist within the limits of State of Telangana and 
therefore, the finding of the High Court all such ‘laws’ pertain only 
to the State of Andhra Pradesh cannot be the correct law and the 
legal fiction should be that such laws would be in force in the new 
State unless altered or repealed or amended by it, in accordance 
with law. If in the light of the aforesaid Govt. orders especially dated 
26.05.2014, the position is not construed in the said manner it will 
create only lawlessness or in other words a total vacuum in the subject 
matter(s) in which event persons could engage in such offences with 
impunity to certain extent. There cannot be any doubt that virtually 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
145
The State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. 
A. Satish Kumar & Ors.
it is to avoid such a situation that the aforementioned Government 
orders were issued and, therefore, any contra-construction would 
defeat the very soul of the provisions under the PC Act as also 
the very intent and purpose of the Government orders which were 
given the status of ‘law’ by virtue of definition under para 2(f) of the 
Circular Memo dated 26.05.2014 issued under Section 3 of the AP 
Reorganisation Act. 
22.	 In the light of the discussion as above and construction of the Govt. 
orders it can only be held that the High Court had erred in holding that 
there was no notification issued conferring the status of Special Court 
in terms of Section 4 of the PC Act to the CBI Court, Hyderabad. Now, 
the transfer of the cases concerned subsequent to the CBI Policy 
Division order regarding the re-defining the territorial jurisdiction of 
CBI, Hyderabad and Vishakhapatnam branches dated 28.03.2019 
and issuance of notification by the High Court of Telangana vide 
ROC No.334/E-1/2008 dated 03.09.2019 and the transfer of CC 
Nos.35 of 2020 and 37 of 2020 to the Court of the Special Judge 
for CBI Cases, Kurnool were held as in accordance with law by the 
High Court. In such circumstances and in the light of the conclusion 
already arrived at,the terms of the provisions under circular memo 
dated 26.05.2014 all “laws” applicable to the undivided State of Andhra 
Pradesh on 01.06.2014 would continue to apply to the new States, 
namely, the State of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh 
despite the bifurcation of the erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh till 
such time they were altered, repealed or amended.
23.	 Another aspect that skipped the attention of the High Court, which 
will independent of the aforesaid consideration and conclusion on 
the Government orders, cloth the CBI with the power to register and 
investigate the offence alleged against the first respondent in the 
captioned appeals.
24.	 A. Satish Kumar, the first respondent in the former appeal was the 
accused in CC No.13 of 2022. He was working as Superintendent in 
Central Excise at Nandyal (Kurnool) district. Sri Challa Sreenivasulu 
was working as Accounts Assistant in the office of the Senior Divisional 
Financial Manager, South Central Railway, Guntakal. The offence 
alleged against both of them was under Section 7 of the PC Act, 
which is a Central Act. Bearing in mind the aspects we will consider 
the challenge against the impugned judgment.
146
25.	 Irrespective of the place of posting, the aforesaid factual position 
would go onto show that they were Central Government employees/
Central Government Undertaking employees and allegedly committed 
serious offence under PC Act, which is a Central Act. Therefore, the 
question is in such circumstances merely because such an employee 
works within the territory of a particular State,to register an FIR 
by the CBI in connection with commission of an offence under a 
Central Act whether consent from the State Government concerned 
is required or not? The said question is no longer a legal conundrum 
in view of the decisions of this Court in Kanwal Tanuj v. State of 
Bihar and Ors.5 and in Fertico Marketing and Investment Pvt. 
Ltd.’s case (supra).
26.	 In Kanwal Tanju’s case (supra), after extracting Section 5 and 6 of 
DSPE Act, in para 19 thereof, this Court held thus: -
“19. Sections 5 and 6 of the 1946 Act read thus: -
5. Extension of powers and jurisdiction of special 
police establishment to other areas. - (1) The Central 
Government may by order extend to any area (including 
Railway areas) ina State, not being a Union territory the 
powers and jurisdiction of members of the Delhi Special 
Police Establishment for the investigation of any offences 
or classes of offences specified in a notification under 
section 3.
(2) When by an order under sub-section (1) the powers and 
jurisdiction of members of the said police establishment 
are extended to any such area, a member thereof may, 
subject to any orders which the Central Government may 
make in this behalf, discharge the functions of a police 
officer in that area and shall, while so discharging such 
functions, be deemed to be a member of the police force 
of that area and be vested with the powers, functions and 
privileges and be subject to the liabilities of a police officer 
belonging to that police force.
(3) Where any such order under sub-section (1) is made 
relation to any area, then, without prejudice to the provisions 
5	
2020 INSC 357 : 2020 SCC OnLine SC 395
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
147
The State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. 
A. Satish Kumar & Ors.
of sub-section (2), any member of the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment of or above the rank of Sub-Inspector may, 
subject to any orders which the Central Government may 
make in this behalf, exercise the powers of the officer 
in charge of a police station in that area and when so 
exercising such powers, shall be deemed to be an officer 
in charge of a police station discharging the functions of 
such an officer within the limits of his station.
6. Consent of State Government to exercise of powers 
and jurisdiction.—Nothing contained in section 5 shall 
be deemed to enable any member of the Delhi Special 
Police Establishment to exercise powers and jurisdiction in 
any area in a State, not being a Union territory or railway 
area, without the consent of the Government of that State.
Such a consent may not be necessary regarding the 
investigation by the special police force (DSPE) in respect 
of specified offences committed within Union Territory 
and other offences associated therewith. That may be 
so, even if one of the accused involved in the given 
case may be residing or employed in some other State 
(outside the Union Territory) including in connection with 
the affairs of the State/local body/corporation, company 
or bank of the State or controlled by the State/institution 
receiving or having received financial aid from the State 
Government, as the case may be. Taking any other view 
would require the special police force to comply with the 
formality of taking consent for investigation even in relation 
to specified offence committed within Union Territory, from 
the concerned State merely because of the fortuitous 
situation that part of the associated offence is committed 
in other State and the accused involved in the offence is 
residing in or employed in connection with the affairs of 
that State. Such interpretation would result in an absurd 
situation especially when the 1946 Act extends to the whole 
of India and the special police force has been constituted 
with a special purpose for investigation of specified offences 
committed within the Union Territory, in terms of notification 
issued under Section 3 of the 1946 Act.
148
26. Indeed, the said notification contains a proviso, which 
predicates that if any public servant employed in connection 
with the affairs of the Government of Bihar is concerned 
in offences being investigated by the special police force 
pursuant to the notification, prior consent of the State 
Government qua him shall be obtained. This proviso 
must operate limited to cases or offences which have 
been committed within the territory of the State of Bihar. 
If the specified offence is committed outside the State of 
Bihar, as in this case in Delhi, the State police will have 
no jurisdiction to investigate such offence and for which 
reason seeking consent of the State to investigate the 
same would not arise. In our opinion, the stated proviso 
will have no application to the offence in question and 
thus the Delhi special police force/DSPE (CBI) must be 
held to be competent to register the FIR at Delhi and also 
to investigate the same without the consent of the State.
27. …
28. Suffice it to observe that the proviso contained in the 
stated notification dated 19.2.1996 cannot be the basis 
to disempower the special police force/DSPE (CBI) from 
registering the offence committed at Delhi to defraud 
the Government of India undertaking (BRBCL) and 
siphoning of its funds and having its registered office at 
Delhi. Allegedly, the stated offence has been committed 
at Delhi. If so, the Delhi Courts will have jurisdiction to 
take cognizance thereof. The State police (State of Bihar) 
cannot investigate the specified offences committed and 
accomplished at Delhi, being outside the territory of the 
State of Bihar. It must follow that the consent of the State 
of Bihar to investigate such offence is not required in law 
and for which reason, the special police force would be 
competent to carry on the investigation thereof even if 
one of the accused allegedly involved in the commission 
of stated offence happens to be resident of the State of 
Bihar or employed in connection with the affairs of the 
Government of Bihar and allegedly committed associated 
offences in that capacity. In other words, consent of the 
State under Section 6 cannot come in the way or constrict 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
149
The State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. 
A. Satish Kumar & Ors.
the jurisdiction of the special police force constituted under 
Section 2 to investigate specified offences under Section 3 
of the 1946 Act committed within the Union Territories. 
Indeed, when the Court of competent jurisdiction proceeds 
to take cognizance of offence and particularly against the 
appellant, it may consider the question of necessity of a 
prior sanction of the State of Bihar qua its official(s) as 
may be required by law. That question can be considered 
on its own merits in accordance with law.”
27.	 In the decision in Fertico Marketing and Investment Pvt. Ltd.’s 
case (supra), this Court in paragraph 26 held thus:-
“26. Recently, a bench of this Court consisting one of us 
(Khanwilkar J.) had an occasion to consider the aforesaid 
provisions of DSPE Act, in Kanwal Tanuj v. State of Bihar, 
(2020) 20 SCC 531. In the said case, the question arose, 
as to whether when an offence was committed in the Union 
Territory and one of the accused was residing/employed 
in some other State outside the said Union Territory, the 
Members of DSPE had power to investigate the same, 
unless there was a specific consent given by the concerned 
State under Section 6 of the DSPE Act. The contention 
on behalf of the appellant before the High Court was that 
since the appellant was employed in connection with the 
affairs of the Government of Bihar, an investigation was 
not permissible, unless there was a specific consent of 
State of Bihar under Section 6 of the DSPE Act. This Court 
rejected the said contention holding that if the offence is 
committed in Delhi, merely because the investigation of 
the said offence incidentally transcends to the Territory 
of State of Bihar, it cannot be held that the investigation 
against an officer employed in the territory of Bihar cannot 
be permitted, unless there was specific consent under 
Section 6 of the DSPE Act. While considering the argument 
on behalf of the State, that such a consent was necessary 
for CBI to proceed with the investigation, this Court held 
that the respondent-State having granted general consent 
in terms of Section 6 of the DSPE Act vide notification 
dated 19.02.1996, it was not open to the State to argue 
to the contrary.”
150
28.	 In the contextual situation it is also relevant to refer to Resolution 
No.4-31-61-Tdated 01.04.1963 of Ministry of Home Affairs establishing 
the Central Bureau of Investigation. Going by the said resolution 
dated 01.04.1963, it provides the function of the CBI incases where 
public servants under the control of the Central Government are 
involved either themselves or with the State Government servants 
and/or other person.
29.	 Thus, upon diallage we find it difficult to accede to the contentions 
of the first respondent in the captioned appeals made in a bid to 
support and sustain the impugned judgment.In such circumstances, 
considering the questions from such different angles we are of the 
firm view that the impugned judgment whereunder subject FIRs and 
further proceedings in pursuance thereof, were quashed cannot be 
sustained.
30.	 Hence, the appeals are allowed. Accordingly, the impugned common 
order dated 13.04.2023 passed by the High Court in WP No.26990 
of 2021, and 5441 of 2022 are set aside. Resultantly, CC Nos.13 of 
2022 and 15 of 2022 arising respectively from the FIR Nos.10A/2017 
and RC22(A)/2017, CBI, HYD, are restored into the files of Court of 
Special Jude for CBI Cases, Kurnool, where it was pending at the 
time of passing of the impugned order. Needless to say, that after 
following the requisite procedures and in accordance with law the 
trial Court shall continue with those cases against the respective 
first respondent in the captioned appeals.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey