[2025] 10 S.C.R. 66 : 2025 INSC 1095
Vinod Kumar Pandey & Anr. 
v. 
Seesh Ram Saini & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 11740 of 2025)
10 September 2025
[Pankaj Mithal* and Prasanna B. Varale, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the correctness of the order passed by the 
High Court holding that prima facie cognizable offences are made 
out for investigation against the appellant-officers of the CBI, and 
directing the Delhi Police to register a case.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.154 – Registration of 
FIR upon receiving information about cognizable offence – 
Writ petitions seeking directions for registration of FIR 
against appellants- officers on deputation to CBI alleging 
commission of offences u/ss.506, 341, 342, 166, and ss.218, 
463, 465, 469, 166 and 120-B IPC – Single Judge of the High 
Court rejecting the conclusion reached by the CBI’s enquiry 
officer that no offence was made out and that the allegations 
of abuse and coercion were unsubstantiated, held that prima 
facie cognizable offences made out for investigation against 
the officers, directed the Delhi Police to register a case, and 
to get the matter investigated by the Special Cell – Appeals 
thereagainst, dismissed by the Division Bench – Interference: 
Held: Not appropriate to interfere with the impugned judgment and 
order of the High Court in exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction 
u/Art.136 – Report of the CBI at best is a preliminary enquiry report 
submitted before the registration of the FIR – However, such an 
enquiry is not ordinarily contemplated in law before registration of 
FIR, and hence is not a conclusive report to be relied upon to oust 
the power of the Constitutional Court to record its own conclusion 
about commission of a cognizable offence, if any, on the material 
or the allegations in the complaints – Genuineness or credibility 
of the information is not the condition precedent for registration of 
an FIR – If the Constitutional Court has exercised its discretion in 
* Author
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
67
Vinod Kumar Pandey & Anr. v. Seesh Ram Saini & Ors.
entertaining the petitions and directing for the registration of the FIR 
against the two officers, on being satisfied that the commission of a 
cognizable offence is prima facie made out against them, no good 
reason to interfere with such discretion – Opinion expressed by the 
High Court in regard to commission of the cognizable offences is 
only a prima facie opinion and has to be treated as such, so as not 
to affect the discretion of the I.O., subsequent to the investigation – 
Registration of the FIR against the two officers not likely to cause 
any prejudice to them – They will have the right to participate in the 
investigation to establish that they have not committed any offence, 
as alleged – It would however, not be a prudent exercise at this stage 
to scuttle the registration of the FIR or the investigation, when the 
High Court in exercise of its constitutional powers had opined that 
prima facie, a cognizable offence is made out against the officers, 
that too upon elaborate consideration of the preliminary inquiry 
report of CBI – It would be dichotomy of justice if such offence is 
allowed to go uninvestigated particularly when there is involvement 
of the officers on deputation to CBI – Justice must not only be done, 
but must also be seen to be done – It is high time that sometimes 
those who investigate must also be investigated to keep alive the 
faith of the public at large in the system – Investigation would be 
conducted by the Delhi Police itself but by an officer not below 
the rank of Assistant Commissioner of Police – I.O. may consider 
inquiry conducted by the Joint Director, CBI during the investigation 
by him, but not to treat it as conclusive – I.O. would conduct the 
investigation without being influenced by any finding or observation 
made by the High Court or this Court and conclude the same as 
expeditiously as possible. [Paras 28, 32-41]
Case Law Cited
Pradeep Nirankarnath Sharma v. State of Gujarat [2025] 4 SCR 
32 : (2025) 4 SCC 818; Sakiri Vasu v. State of U.P. [2007] 12 
SCR 1100 : (2008) 2 SCC 409; Ramesh Kumari v. State (NCT of 
Delhi) [2006] 2 SCR 403 : (2006) 2 SCC 677; Anurag Bhatnagar 
& Anr.  v. State (NCT of Delhi) & Anr., 2025 INSC 895; Lalita 
Kumari v. Government of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. [2013] 14 SCR 
713 : (2014) 2 SCC 1 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal Code, 1860; Constitution 
of India.
68
Supreme Court Reports
List of Keywords
Cognizable offences; Investigation; Officers of the CBI; Delhi Police 
to register a case; Registration of FIR upon receiving information 
about cognizable offence; Registration of FIR; Investigation by 
the Special Cell; Report of the CBI; Preliminary enquiry report; 
Constitutional Court; Closure report; Filing of chargesheet.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 11740 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 13.03.2019 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in LPA No. 1194 of 2006
With:
Civil Appeal No(s). 11742, 11743, and 11741 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Ranjit Kumar, Kirtiman Singh, Sr. Advs., R. Chandrachud, Waize 
Ali Noor, Ms. Vidhi Jain, Minal Kumar Sharma, Mrinal Sharma, 
Mrinal Kumar Sharma, Zillur Rahman, D. Venkta Krishna.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General, Suryaprakash V. Raju, A.S.G., 
Dhruv Mehta, Yashraj Singh Deora, Ms. R. Bala, Sr. Advs., 
Ms. Anupama, P. N. Puri, Arvind Kumar Sharma, Mukesh Kumar 
Maroria, Kanu Agarwal, Udai Khanna, Sughosh Sunramanyam, 
Ms. Balaji Srinivasan, Rajesh Kumar Singh, Annam Venkatesh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.	
Delay condoned.
2.	
Leave granted.
3.	
Heard Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel, Mr. S. V. Raju, 
learned Additional Solicitor General and Mr. Dhruv Mehta, learned 
senior counsel for the parties.
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
69
Vinod Kumar Pandey & Anr. v. Seesh Ram Saini & Ors.
4.	
The cases are quite simple but have a chequered history, involving 
the appellants, who are two officers of the Central Bureau of 
Investigation1. One is Vinod Kumar Pandey, the then Inspector of 
CBI, and the other is Neeraj Kumar, the then Joint Director of CBI.
5.	
The two petitions being Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 675 of 2001 and Writ 
Petition (Crl.) No.738 of 2001 under Article 226 of the Constitution of 
India read with Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure2, 1973 
came to be filed by one Vijay Aggarwal and other by one Sheesh 
Ram Saini respectively, seeking directions for registration of First 
Information Report3 against the above two officers on deputation 
to the CBI, namely, Vinod Kumar Pandey and Neeraj Kumar for 
committing offences under Sections 506, 341, 342 and 166, and 
Sections 218, 463, 465, 469, 166 and 120-B of the Indian Penal 
Code4, 1860, as alleged in the writ petitions respectively.
6.	
The aforesaid two writ petitions were decided by the Single Judge 
of the High Court on 26.06.2006 but by separate order(s) passed in 
identical terms. Both the petitions were partly allowed and directions 
were issued to the Delhi Police to register a case on the basis of 
the allegations contained in the complaint dated 05.07.2001 lodged 
by Sheesh Ram Saini with PS Lodhi Colony and complaint dated 
23.02.2004 addressed to Commissioner of Police, Delhi by Vijay 
Aggarwal respectively, and to get the matter investigated by the 
Special Cell of the Delhi Police by an Officer not below the rank of 
Assistant Commissioner of Police, uninfluenced by the findings and 
the observations contained in the Inquiry Report dated 26.04.2005 
conducted by the Joint Director, CBI.
7.	
In short, the writ petitions were partly allowed with the direction to 
register the FIR with the finding that prima facie cognizable offences 
are made out for investigation against the appellant-officers.
8.	
Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment(s) and order(s) of the High 
Court dated 26.06.2006, both the officers of the CBI preferred 
separate Letters Patent Appeal(s)5 before the Division Bench of the 
1	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘CBI’
2	
Hereinafter referred to as’Cr.P.C.’
3	
In short ‘FIR’
4	
In short ‘IPC’
5	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘LPA’
70
Supreme Court Reports
High Court. The said LPAs were dismissed on 13.03.2019 on the 
ground of maintainability.
9.	
Out of the present four appeals, two appeals [D.No.10495 of 2019 
and D.No.10508 of 2019] are against the order(s) of the learned 
Single Judge dated 26.06.2006 partly allowing the petitions, and 
other two appeals [S.L.P.(C) No. 7900 of 2019 and S.L.P.(C) No. 
7897 of 2019] are against the order of the Division Bench of the High 
Court dated 13.03.2019 dismissing the LPAs as not maintainable.
10.	 We had made it clear to the parties in the very beginning that we 
would not enter into the question of maintainability of the LPAs so 
as to adjudicate the appeals arising out of their dismissal for the 
reason that we would consider the correctness of the judgment and 
order(s) dated 26.06.2006 on merits as would have been done in 
the LPAs by the Division Bench. The counsel for the parties agreed 
and proceeded to advance arguments accordingly on merits.
11.	 A preliminary objection was raised with regard to delay of more than 
12 years in challenging the judgment and order(s) of the Single 
Judge dated 26.06.2006. 
12.	 The said delay has been explained taking the ground that the 
appellants were bona fide pursuing their LPAs before the Division 
Bench of the High Court and once they realized that the LPAs are 
not maintainable and they have been dismissed as not maintainable, 
they decided to challenge the judgment and order(s) passed by the 
learned Single Judge before the Supreme Court.
13.	 In view of the above explanation, though technically, pursuing the 
LPAs and the time spent thereon may not be a very good cause to 
condone the delay but since there is no willful or deliberate delay or 
any default on part of the appellants in assailing the judgment and 
order(s) of the Single Judge dated 26.06.2006 rather they were all 
thoroughly vigilant of their rights, we have ignored the delay and have 
heard the parties on merits, more particularly, on the correctness of 
the judgment and order(s) of the Single Judge.
14.	 Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel for the appellants, argued 
that the information/complaint submitted by Sheesh Ram Saini and 
by Vijay Kumar Aggarwal does not make out a cognizable offence 
for enabling the Court to direct for the registration of the FIR. The 
High Court could not have directed for the registration of the FIR 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
71
Vinod Kumar Pandey & Anr. v. Seesh Ram Saini & Ors.
as the procedure laid down by the various decisions of this Court 
was not followed before approaching the High Court. Secondly, the 
High Court could not have recorded a finding of commission of a 
cognizable offence which leaves nothing for the Investigating Officer6 
to opine on after the completion of the investigation, except to submit 
a chargesheet. He further argued that in the so-called preliminary 
inquiry conducted by the Joint Director, CBI, it has been reported that 
no cognizable offence is made out for the purpose of investigation, 
therefore, it was not open for the High Court to have substituted its 
own finding and to direct for the registration of the FIR.
15.	 He emphasized that even if for the sake of argument it is accepted 
that a case for investigation is made out against Vinod Kumar 
Pandey, there is no averment or iota of material to rope in Neeraj 
Kumar, the other officer.
16.	 A further submission has been made by Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned 
senior counsel for the appellants, that the High Court manifestly erred 
in directing the investigation to be conducted by the Special Cell of 
the Delhi Police, which ordinarily investigates the matters relating to 
terrorism. The High Court also committed an error in directing the 
exclusion of preliminary inquiry report dated 26.04.2005 of the Joint 
Director, CBI from consideration during the investigation.
17.	 Mr. S. V. Raju, learned Additional Solicitor General for the respondents, 
pressed an application for the impleadment of the CBI contending 
that as the preliminary inquiry was conducted by an officer of the 
CBI and the case involves allegations against the officers of the 
CBI, therefore, the CBI is a proper party so as to defend the inquiry 
report and its officers.
18.	 On merits, he submitted that the complaints do not make out any 
cognizable offence and are barred by Section 197 Cr.P.C., as whatever 
acts have been performed by the officers, they were in discharge 
of their official duties. The complaints are also hit by Section 140 of 
the Delhi Police Act, 1978 and are barred by limitation.
19.	 Admittedly, the CBI was a party in the writ petitions before the High 
Court and had not chosen to assail the impugned order(s), meaning 
thereby that the CBI never felt aggrieved by the said order(s). The 
6	
In short ‘I.O.’
72
Supreme Court Reports
CBI, even if impleaded, would be added as the respondent or a 
proforma respondent. It is well recognized in law that a respondent 
or a proforma respondent may support the judgment impugned but 
cannot assail the same in his capacity as a respondent. The CBI has 
not independently challenged the aforesaid order(s) of the High Court.
20.	 Moreover, the CBI is not the party actually aggrieved by the direction 
given by the High Court for the registration of the FIR against the 
two officers. It is the officers who are aggrieved in their personal 
capacity and not the institution to which they are on deputation. It is, 
therefore, for the officers to defend themselves by taking appropriate 
legal remedies and the CBI has nothing to do with it. This apart, the 
report of the CBI is not under challenge, therefore, the contention 
that CBI has to support the report of its officer is not appreciable. 
Accordingly, we do not deem it necessary to permit impleadment 
of the CBI and to consider any objections as raised by the learned 
Additional Solicitor General.
21.	 The plain reading of the impugned judgment and order(s) of the 
Single Judge of the High Court dated 26.06.2006 reveals that the 
officers of the CBI in the dock have committed irregularities, if not 
illegality in discharge of their official duties and are prima facie guilty 
of the commission of the offences as alleged. This is clearly reflected 
from the averments contained in the complaints and the petitions. 
Both the officers have acted in connivance, and it is alleged that 
one of the officers, Vinod Kumar Pandey, had acted at the behest 
of the Senior Officer, Neeraj Kumar. The question whether Vinod 
Kumar Pandey acted on the advice or behest of Neeraj Kumar or 
whether they were in connivance, is a matter of fact which has to 
be investigated.
22.	 The Single Judge of the High Court in Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 738 
of 2001, upon consideration of the material on record including 
the inquiry report dated 26.04.2005 of the Joint Director of CBI, 
found that cognizable offences were prima facie made out against 
the officers of the CBI i.e. the appellants. The allegation that the 
documents were seized on 26.04.2000 without preparation of the 
seizure memo stood substantiated even in the inquiry report, which 
recorded that the memo of seizure was prepared only on 27.04.2000 
and not at the time of seizure on 26.04.2000. The Court disagreed 
with the explanation that the documents were taken for scrutiny 
on 26.04.2000 noting that such a version was contrary both to the 
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
73
Vinod Kumar Pandey & Anr. v. Seesh Ram Saini & Ors.
records and the findings of the inquiry itself. The Single Judge also 
refused to accept that it was a procedural irregularity and held that 
the preparation of seizure memo in the facts and circumstances of 
the case was not in accordance with the CBI Crime Manual and 
attracted penal provisions of Sections 218, 463, 465, 469, 166 and 
120-B IPC. 
23.	 The High Court in Writ Petition (Crl.) No.675 of 2001, preferred by 
Vijay Aggarwal, observed that V.K. Pandey had summoned Vijay 
Aggarwal on 07.06.2001 and 11.06.2001 in clear derogation of a 
bail order dated 27.11.2000 passed by the Special Judge, which 
prima facie indicated a mala fide and malicious exercise of authority. 
24.	 The Court held that the allegations of abuse, intimidation, and threats, 
including use of vulgar language to coerce Vijay Aggarwal to ensure 
withdrawal of his brother’s complaint against Neeraj Kumar, were 
serious and not unfounded. The Court observed that such conduct 
was grave in nature and prima facie disclosed the commission of 
cognizable offences under IPC. 
25.	 The High Court rejected the conclusion reached by the CBI’s enquiry 
officer that no offence was made out and that the allegations of 
abuse and coercion were unsubstantiated. It was observed that the 
correctness or veracity of the allegations could not have been gone 
into at the stage of a preliminary enquiry and that such allegations, 
being serious in nature, could not be brushed aside lightly. The Court 
clarified that Vijay Aggarwal’s failure to file objections to the enquiry 
report could not amount to acceptance of its findings. 
26.	 The Writ Court emphasized that CBI officers, being public servants, 
cannot claim immunity if they knowingly prepare false or incorrect 
records during the course of seizure or abuse their official position. 
Such acts on their part are serious acts and are not capable of being 
ignored and therefore, investigation in the matter is necessary.
27.	 In Pradeep Nirankarnath Sharma v. State of Gujarat,7 this Court, 
in a very recent judgment held, that where the allegations pertain 
to the abuse of official position and corrupt practices while holding 
public office, such actions fall squarely within category of cognizable 
offences and therefore, they are to be inquired into, and holding 
7	
(2025) 4 SCC 818
74
Supreme Court Reports
of any preliminary inquiry before the registration of the FIR is not 
necessary. If the information provided to the police or the preliminary 
report discloses a commission of a cognizable offence, the police 
is duty bound under Section 154 Cr.P.C. to register an FIR without 
any delay. 
28.	 The report of the CBI at best is a preliminary enquiry report submitted 
before the registration of the FIR. However, such an enquiry is not 
ordinarily contemplated in law before registration of FIR, and hence 
is not a conclusive report to be relied upon to oust the power of the 
Constitutional Court to record its own conclusion about commission 
of a cognizable offence, if any, on the material or the allegations in 
the complaints.
29.	 Undoubtedly, the High Court(s) should discourage writ petitions or 
petitions under Section 482 Cr.P.C. where alternative remedies are 
available. Nonetheless, as observed even in Sakiri Vasu v. State of 
U.P.,8 it is equally true that alternative remedy is not an absolute bar 
for invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction or the inherent jurisdiction 
of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution or Section 
482 Cr.P.C.
30.	 In Ramesh Kumari v. State (NCT of Delhi)9, the Court denounced 
the dismissal of the petition seeking registration of the FIR, solely on 
the ground of alternative remedy, and held that ground of alternative 
remedy would not be a substitute in law for refusing to register a 
case when the complaint of the citizen makes it a cognizable offence. 
31.	 In a recent landmark decision, Anurag Bhatnagar & Anr. v. State 
(NCT of Delhi) & Anr.10, this Court held that although the complainant 
approached the Court, in that case the Magistrate, without exhausting 
the alternative remedies available, it was a mere procedural irregularity 
and not illegality, as the Court was competent to order registration 
of the FIR. It was further observed that when information disclosing 
commission of cognizable offence is conveyed to the police, they 
cannot refuse to register the FIR.
32.	 Since, it is the duty of the police to register an FIR if a prima facie 
cognizable offence is made out, the police is not required to go 
8	
(2008) 2 SCC 409
9	
(2006) 2 SCC 677
10	
2025 INSC 895
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
75
Vinod Kumar Pandey & Anr. v. Seesh Ram Saini & Ors.
into the genuineness and credibility of the said information. It has 
been so laid down very clearly in Ramesh Kumari (Supra) that 
the genuineness or credibility of the information is not the condition 
precedent for registration of an FIR. 
33.	 The complainants Sheesh Ram Saini and Vijay Kumar Aggarwal 
have approached the police authorities by means of complaints dated 
05.07.2001 and 23.02.2004 to get the matter investigated, but as 
no action was purportedly taken thereof rather it is alleged that the 
police authorities expressed reluctance to entertain the complaints as 
it would not be proper on part of the police to investigate against the 
officers of the CBI, the complainants approached the Constitutional 
Court for necessary action. 
34.	 Therefore, if the Constitutional Court has exercised its discretion in 
entertaining the petitions and directing for the registration of the FIR 
against the two officers, on being satisfied that the commission of 
a cognizable offence is prima facie made out against them, we see 
no good reason to interfere with such discretion. At best, as argued 
by Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel for the appellants, we 
can say that the opinion expressed by the High Court in regard to 
commission of the cognizable offences is only a prima facie opinion 
and has to be treated as such, so as not to affect the discretion of 
the I.O., subsequent to the investigation.
35.	 The registration of the FIR against the two officers is not likely to 
cause any prejudice to them. They will have the right to participate 
in the investigation to establish that they have not committed any 
offence, as alleged. Thereupon, the I.O. on consideration of the 
material collected during investigation, may submit a closure report 
or file the chargesheet. In the event, a closure report is filed and 
accepted by the Magistrate, the appellants will have no grievance. 
On the other hand, in the event, a charge sheet is submitted, the 
appellants will have an opportunity to assail the same before the 
appropriate forum. 
36.	 It would however, not be a prudent exercise at this stage to scuttle 
the registration of the FIR or the investigation, when the High Court 
in exercise of its constitutional powers had opined that prima facie, 
a cognizable offence is made out against the two officers, that too 
upon elaborate consideration of the preliminary inquiry report of the 
Joint Director of CBI. 
76
Supreme Court Reports
37.	 It is trite to point out that the offence is alleged to have been committed 
in the year 2000 and till date the matter had not been allowed to be 
investigated. It would be dichotomy of justice if such an offence is 
allowed to go uninvestigated particularly when there is involvement 
of the officers on deputation to CBI. It is cardinal in law that justice 
must not only be done, but must also be seen to be done. It is high 
time that sometimes those who investigate must also be investigated 
to keep alive the faith of the public at large in the system.
38.	 In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we do not consider 
it appropriate to interfere with the impugned judgment and order(s) 
of the High Court in exercise of our discretionary jurisdiction under 
Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
39.	 However, we make it clear that since the Special Cell of the Delhi 
Police is supposed to investigate the matters concerning terrorism, 
upon registration of the FIR in the case at hand, the investigation 
would be conducted by the Delhi Police itself but by an officer not 
below the rank of Assistant Commissioner of Police.
40.	 Secondly, in view of the law laid down in Lalita Kumari vs. 
Government of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.11, and reiterated thereafter 
to the effect that registration of FIR is mandatory under Section 
154 Cr.P.C. if the information discloses commission of a cognizable 
offence and no preliminary inquiry before FIR is permissible in such 
a situation; however, if the information received does not disclose 
a cognizable offence but indicates necessity of an inquiry being 
conducted, a preliminary inquiry may be conducted only to ascertain 
facts disclosing cognizable offence, if any. Thus, treating the inquiry 
conducted by the Joint Director, CBI as a preliminary inquiry, we 
permit the same to be looked into, if necessary, by the I.O. during 
the investigation by him, but not to treat it as conclusive. The I.O. 
would conduct the investigation strictly in accordance with law without 
being influenced by any finding or observation made by the High 
Court in the impugned order(s) or by this Court hereinabove and 
shall conclude the same as expeditiously as possible, preferably 
within three months as the matter is quite old.
41.	 The appellants are directed to join the investigation and to cooperate 
with the I.O. by appearing before him, as and when called upon. 
11	
(2014) 2 SCC 1
[2025] 10 S.C.R. 
77
Vinod Kumar Pandey & Anr. v. Seesh Ram Saini & Ors.
In the event they join the investigation and appear before the I.O. 
regularly, no coercive steps shall be taken against them, including that 
of arrest, until and unless the I.O. records satisfaction that custodial 
interrogation at any stage is necessary. 
42.	 The two appeals [S.L.P.(C) No. 7900 of 2019 and S.L.P.(C) No. 
7897 of 2019] stand disposed of in the above terms and the two 
appeals [D.No.10495 of 2019 and D.No.10508 of 2019] are partly 
allowed by modifying the judgment and orders of the High Court 
dated 26.06.2006 as indicated above.
43.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain