[2025] 9 S.C.R. 108 : 2025 INSC 945
M/s Shikhar Chemicals 
v. 
The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
(Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 11445 of 2025)
08 August 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Reconsideration of the directions issued in the order dated 
04.08.2025 in view of the request made by the Chief Justice of India.
Headnotes†
Directions by Supreme Court – Recall/deletion of – Vide order 
dated 04.08.2025, this Court set aside the impugned judgment 
of the High Court of Allahabad wherein the concerned Judge 
had declined to quash the criminal complaint despite the 
matter being a purely civil dispute of recovery of money and 
held that the remedy of the civil suit for the said purpose was 
unreasonable – Matter was remanded back to High Court and 
directions were issued requesting the Chief Justice of the 
High Court to withdraw the criminal roster from the concerned 
Judge till his retirement and make him sit in a Division Bench 
with a senior judge – Letter from the Chief Justice of India 
requesting to reconsider the aforesaid directions:
Held: Intention was not to cause embarrassment or cast aspersions 
on the concerned Judge – Directions were issued keeping in mind 
that the impugned order was not the only erroneous and perverse 
order of the concerned Judge that was looked into for the first time 
rather, many such erroneous orders had come up over a period 
of time – It was not just a matter of error or mistake committed 
by the Judge concerned in appreciating the legal points or facts 
however, this Court was concerned about the appropriate direction 
to be issued in the interest of justice and to protect the honour and 
dignity of the institution – However, in due deference to the written 
request made by the Chief Justice of India, directions in paras 25 
and 26 deleted from order dated 04.08.2025. [Paras 4, 6, 7]
Justice delivery system – Judiciary – Honour and dignity 
of – Protection of – Duty of Courts/Judges. [Paras 6, 11, 12]
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
109
M/s Shikhar Chemicals v. The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
Case Law Cited
Rikhab Birani & Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr., 2025 INSC 
512 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Reconsideration of the directions; Request made by Hon’ble the 
Chief Justice of India; Letter from the Chief Justice of India; Recall 
of directions; Directions deleted; Directions recalled; Request to 
the Chief Justice of the High Court; Withdrawal of criminal roster 
from the concerned Judge; Concerned Judge; Request to make the 
concerned Judge sit with a senior Judge; Constitutional responsibility 
of Supreme Court; Appellate jurisdiction under Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India; Honour and dignity of judiciary; Perverse 
and unjust orders from High Court; Administrative power of the 
Chief Justice of the High Court; Master of the roster; Institutional 
concerns; Rule of law; Justice delivery system.
Case Arising From
EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Special Leave 
Petition (Criminal) No. 11445 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 05.05.2025 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in A482 No. 2507 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Petitioner:
Surjadipta Seth, Arindam Ghosh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
We have received an undated letter from Hon’ble the Chief Justice 
of India requesting us to reconsider the directions issued by us in 
Paras 25 and 26 respectively of our order dated 04th August, 2025 
passed in Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 11445 of 2025.
110
Supreme Court Reports
2.	
In such circumstances, referred to above, we directed the Registry to 
re-notify the main matter for the purpose of considering the request 
made by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India. Accordingly, the matter 
has been re-notified today.
3.	
By our order dated 4th August, 2025, we set aside the impugned 
judgment of the High Court of Allahabad and remanded the matter 
to the High Court for fresh consideration in accordance with law. 
While partly allowing SLP (Crl.) No. 11445 of 2025, we observed 
the following:-
“22. In the result, we partly allow this petition and set aside 
the impugned order passed by the High Court. We remand 
the matter to the High Court for fresh consideration of 
the Criminal Miscellaneous Application No.2507 of 2024. 
The quashing petition shall be reheard on its own merits 
keeping in mind the dictum laid in the two decisions of 
this Court referred to above.
23. We request the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the High 
Court of Allahabad to assign this matter to any other Judge 
of the High Court as he may deem fit.
24. The Chief Justice of High Court shall immediately 
withdraw the present criminal determination from the 
concerned Judge.
25. The Chief Justice shall make the concerned judge sit 
in a Division Bench with a seasoned senior judge of the 
High Court.
26. We further direct that the concerned judge shall not 
be assigned any criminal determination, till he demits 
office. If at all at some point of time, he is to be made to 
sit as a single judge, he shall not be assigned any criminal 
determination.
27. We have been constrained to issue directions as 
contained in Paras 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26 respectively, 
referred to above, keeping in mind that the impugned 
order is not the only erroneous order of the concerned 
Judge that we have looked into for the first time. Many 
such erroneous orders have been looked into by us over 
a period of time.”
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
111
M/s Shikhar Chemicals v. The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
4.	
At the outset, we must clarify that our intention was not to cause 
embarrassment or cast aspersions on the concerned Judge. We 
would not even think of doing so. However, when matters cross the 
threshold and the dignity of the institution is imperiled, it becomes 
the constitutional responsibility of this Court to intervene, even 
when acting under its appellate jurisdiction under Article 136 of the 
Constitution. The directions in paras 25 and 26 respectively were 
issued keeping in mind the observation in Para 27. At the cost of 
repetition, we reproduce para 27 as under:-
“27. We have been constrained to issue directions as 
contained in Paras 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26 respectively, 
referred to above, keeping in mind that the impugned 
order is not the only erroneous order of the concerned 
Judge that we have looked into for the first time. Many 
such erroneous orders have been looked into by us over 
a period of time.”
5.	
Similarly, whenever we come across legally unimpeachable orders 
and orders that have ensured complete justice to the litigants, we 
have always taken the opportunity to record our appreciation for the 
Judges of the High Courts. The High Courts are not separate islands 
that can be disassociated from this Institution and we reiterate that 
whatever was said in our order was to ensure that the dignity and 
authority of the judiciary as a whole is maintained high in the minds 
of the people of this country, as that will go a long way in reinforcing 
the faith that is reposed in us.
6.	
It is not just a matter of error or mistake committed by the Judge 
concerned in appreciating the legal points or facts. We were concerned 
about the appropriate direction to be issued in the interest of justice 
and with a view to protecting the honour and dignity of the institution. 
The litigants in this country approach different courts of law to seek 
justice. For 90% of the litigants in this country, the High Court is the 
final court of justice. Only the remaining 10% can afford to approach 
the Supreme Court. The litigants who come to court expect the 
justice delivery system to function in accordance with law, not to 
obtain absurd or irrational orders.
7.	
In any view of the matter, since a request has been made in writing 
by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India, and in due deference to the 
same, we hereby delete paras 25 and 26 respectively from our order 
dated 4th August, 2025. The order be corrected accordingly.
112
Supreme Court Reports
8.	
While we are deleting paras 25 and 26 respectively from our order 
dated 04th August, 2025, we leave it to the Chief Justice of the 
Allahabad High Court to look into the matter.
9.	
We fully acknowledge that the Chief Justice of a High Court is the 
master of the roster. But, as observed above, our directions are 
absolutely not interfering with the administrative power of the Chief 
Justice of the High Court. When matters raise institutional concerns 
affecting the rule of law, this Court may be compelled to step in and 
take corrective steps.
10.	 Recently, a Bench comprising former Chief Justice of India Hon’ble 
Mr. Justice Sanjiv Khanna and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sanjay Kumar 
observed in Rikhab Birani & Anr. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr. 
reported in 2025 INSC 512, as follows :-
“We are also constrained to impose costs of Rs. 50,000/- 
(Rupees Fifty Thousand Only) on the State of Uttar Pradesh 
as in spite of repeated judgments/orders of this Court, 
we are being flooded with cases of civil wrongs being 
made the subject matter of criminal proceedings by filing 
chargesheets, etc.”
11.	 We hope that in future, we may not have to come across such 
perverse and unjust orders from any High Court. The endeavour 
of the High Courts should always be to uphold the rule of law and 
maintain institutional credibility. If the Rule of Law is not maintained 
or protected within the court itself, then that would be the end of the 
entire justice delivery system in the country.
12.	 Judges at any level are expected to work efficiently, discharge their 
duties diligently and always strive hard to fulfill their constitutional oath.
13.	 With the aforesaid, we dispose of the Special Leave Petition.
14.	 The Registry is directed to forward one copy of this order at the 
earliest to Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the Allahabad High Court.
Result of the case: Special Leave Petition disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey