[2025] 2 S.C.R. 343 : 2025 INSC 143
Godrej Projects Development Limited 
v. 
Anil Karlekar & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 3334 of 2023)
03 February 2025
[B.R. Gavai* and S.V.N. Bhatti, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
(NCDRC) was justified in disposing of the consumer complaint filed 
by the respondents no. 1 and 2 thereby directing the appellant to 
deduct only 10% of the Basic Sale Price (BSP) towards cancellation 
of the complainants’ apartment and refund the balance amount 
along with simple interest @ 6% p.a. from the date of each payment 
till the date of refund.
Headnotes†
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 – s.2(1)(r) – Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019 – s.2(46) – Complainants booked an 
apartment with appellant and submitted application money – 
Apartment Buyer Agreement was entered into between the 
parties – After completion of construction, appellant offered 
possession to the complainants – However, the complainants 
sought cancellation of the allotment and refund of the amount 
paid – Pursuant thereto, consumer complaint was filed – 
The NCDRC directed the appellant to deduct only 10% of 
the BSP i.e. Rs.17,08,140/- only towards cancellation of the 
complainants’ apartment and refund the balance amount 
Rs.34,04,170/- alongwith simple interest @ 6% p.a. from date 
of each payment till the date of refund – Correctness:
Held: The respondents had cancelled the deal since there was 
recession in the market – In the agreement between the parties, 
the complainants were required to pay earnest money deposit of 
20% of the BSP, which undisputedly was paid – As per clause 
8.4, on termination on account of buyer’s event of default, the 
developer was entitled to forfeit the entire earnest money deposit 
and other dues including interest on delayed payments as specified 
* Author
344
in the agreement – It will be relevant to consider the reciprocal 
obligations of the appellant i.e., the developer in case the developer 
does not comply with the timelines in the agreement – Clauses 4.2 
and 4.3 of the agreement consist the obligations of the developer 
in the event it does not comply with the timelines and a very 
meagre compensation is provided to the apartment purchaser – 
It provides that if the developer fails or neglects to issue the 
possession notice on or before the tentative completion date and/
or on such date as may be extended by mutual consent of the 
parties, the developer shall be liable to pay to the buyer a meagre 
compensation for such a delay at the rate of Rs.5/- per month per 
square feet of the super built up area of the apartment – Thus, 
the agreement was one-sided and totally tilted in favour of the 
developer – It is settled that the courts will not enforce an unfair 
and unreasonable contract or an unfair and unreasonable clause 
in a contract, entered into between parties who are not equal in 
bargaining power – Further, the contractual terms which are ex 
facie one-sided, unfair and unreasonable would constitute unfair 
trade practice u/s. 2(1)(r) of the 1986 Act – The NCDRC, in a series 
of cases right from the year 2015, has held that 10% of the BSP 
is a reasonable amount which is liable to be forfeited as earnest 
money – There is no reason to upset the view consistently taken 
by the NCDRC – However, in the instant case, the NCDRC was 
not justified in awarding interest on the amount to be refunded – As 
the agreement was entered into between the parties in the year 
2014, only after the possession was offered by the appellant to the 
respondents, they sought cancellation of the allotment – There is 
a possibility that the respondents would have utilised the money 
which was payable by them to the appellant for purchasing another 
property at a lower rate – Since, appellant has already refunded 
an amount of Rs.22,01,215/- to the respondents – Therefore, the 
appellant directed to pay the balance amount of Rs.12,02,955/- 
[Rs.34,04,170/- minus Rs.22,01,215/-] to the respondents.  
[Paras 14, 17, 22, 24, 25, 26, 30, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44]
Case Law Cited
Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited and Another 
v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and Another [1986] 2 SCR 278 : (1986) 3 
SCC 156; Maula Bux v. Union of India [1970] 1 SCR 928 : (1969) 
2 SCC 554 – relied on.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
345
Godrej Projects Development Limited v. Anil Karlekar & Ors.
Satish Batra v. Sudhir Rawal [2012] 9 SCR 662 : (2013) 1 SCC 
345; Desh Raj and others v. Rohtash Singh [2022] 18 SCR 65 : 
(2023) 3 SCC 714 – held inapplicable.
Komal Aggarwal v. Godrej Projects Development Ltd., Consumer 
Case No.2139 of 2018 dated 9.11.2022; DLF Ltd. v. Bhagwanti 
Narula, 2015 SCC OnLine NCDRC 1613; Ramesh Malhotra and 
Another v. Emaar Mgf Land Limited and Another, 2020 SCC OnLine 
NCDRC 789; Ireo Grace Realtech Private Limited v. Abhishek 
Khanna and Others [2021] 2 SCR 1 : (2021) 3 SCC 241; Pioneer 
Urban Land and Infrastructure Limited v. Govindan Raghavan [2019] 
5 SCR 1169 : (2019) 5 SCC 725; Wing Commander Arifur Rahman 
Khan and Aleya Sultana and Others v. DLF Southern Homes Private 
Limited (Now Known as Begur OMR Homes Private Limited) and 
Others [2020] 9 SCR 136 : (2020) 16 SCC 512 – referred to.
List of Acts
Consumer Protection Act, 1986; Constitution of India; Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019; Contract Act, 1872. 
List of Keywords
Apartment Buyer Agreement; Cancellation of the allotment; Earnest 
money; Refund of money; Forfeiture of earnest money; Unfair and 
unreasonable contract; Unfair trade practice; Section 74 of the 
Contract Act, 1872; Section 2(46) of Consumer Protection Act, 
2019; Section 2(1)(r) of Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3334 of 2023
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.10.2022 of the National 
Consumers Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi in CC 
No. 262 of 2018
Appearances for Parties
Dhruv Mehta, Sr. Adv., Kapil Madan, Saurabh Gauba, Akshit Narula, 
Shailendra Pratap Singh, Randhir Kumar Ojha, Ms. Surabhi Kapur, 
Advs. for the Appellant.
Ashwarya Sinha, Aditya Malhotra, Advs. for the Respondents.
346
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
B.R. Gavai, J.
1.	
The present appeal takes exception to the final judgment and 
order dated 25th October, 2022 passed in Consumer Complaint No. 
262 of 2018, whereby the National Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission (hereinafter, “NCDRC”) disposed of the Consumer 
Complaint filed by the Respondents No. 1 and 2 (hereinafter referred 
to as, “Complainants” or “Respondents”) thereby directing the 
Appellant to deduct only 10% of the Basic Sale Price (“BSP” for short) 
towards cancellation of the Complainants’ Apartment and refund the 
balance amount along with simple interest @ 6% per annum from 
the date of each payment till the date of refund. Aggrieved thereby, 
the present appeal has been filed under Section 23 of Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986. 
2.	
The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are as given below.
2.1.	 On 10th January, 2014 the Complainants had booked an 
Apartment with the Appellant in the project by the name “Godrej 
Summit” situated at Sector 104, Gurgaon, Haryana by an 
Application Form and submitted Rs. 10,00,000/- as application 
money.
2.2.	 On 20th June, 2014 by an allotment letter, the Appellant allotted 
an Apartment being Apartment No. C-1501 on the 14th floor in 
Tower ‘C’ to the Complainants in the above-mentioned project, 
pursuant to which an Apartment Buyer Agreement (hereafter 
referred to as “the Agreement”) was entered into between the 
Parties.
2.3.	 On 20th June, 2017 the Appellant upon completion of construction 
applied to and subsequently received the Occupation Certificate 
from the Director, Town & Country Planning Department, 
Haryana. 
2.4.	 On 28th June, 2017 the Appellant offered possession to the 
Complainants. The Complainants, however, sought cancellation 
of the allotment and further sought full refund of the amount paid. 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
347
Godrej Projects Development Limited v. Anil Karlekar & Ors.
2.5.	 On 29th September, 2017, the Complainants served a legal 
notice to the Appellant for refund of the amount paid totaling 
Rs. 51,12,310/-. 
2.6.	 Thereafter, on 14th November, 2017, the Complainants filed a 
Consumer Complaint (No. 262 of 2018) before the NCDRC 
inter-alia praying that Appellant be directed to refund the sum 
totaling Rs. 51,12,310/- paid by the Complainants so far, with 
interest @ 18% per annum, calculated from the date of making 
each payment till the date of realization of the sum. 
2.7.	 Vide impugned order dated 25th October, 2022, the NCDRC 
disposed of the Consumer Complaint by directing the Appellant 
to deduct only 10% of the BSP i.e. Rs. 17,08,140/- only towards 
cancellation of the Complainants’ Apartment and refund the 
balance amount Rs.34,04,170/- (i.e. Rs. 51,12,310/- minus 
Rs. 17,08,140/-) along with simple interest @ 6% per annum 
from the date of each payment till the date of refund within 
three months. 
2.8.	 On 5th December, 2022, the NCDRC also dismissed the Review 
Application filed by the Appellant challenging the impugned order.
2.9.	 Aggrieved thereby, on 10th January 2023 the Appellant filed the 
present appeal challenging only the order dated 25th October, 
2022.
2.10.	By an order dated 24th April, 2023, this Court while issuing notice 
had granted stay of the impugned order on the condition that the 
Appellant refunds the amount deposited by the Complainants 
after deducting 20% (earnest money deposit) along with interest 
@ 6% per annum from the date of cancellation of the contract. 
3.	
We have heard Shri Dhruv Mehta, learned Senior Counsel appearing 
on behalf of the Appellant and Shri Ashwarya Sinha, learned Counsel 
appearing on behalf of the Respondents. 
4.	
Shri Dhruv Mehta submits that the NCDRC has grossly erred in 
interfering with the contractual terms as entered into between the 
Parties. It is submitted that the Agreement between the parties 
specifically provided for a forfeiture clause. The Agreement provided 
that the Appellant was entitled to forfeit the entire earnest money and 
any other due payable by the buyer including interest on delayed 
payment. 
348
5.	
He further submits that the NCDRC has specifically come to a 
conclusion that the Appellant was entitled to cancel the Apartment and 
forfeit the amount as per the terms and conditions of the Application 
Form and/or the Agreement between the parties. He submits that 
having arrived at such a finding, the NCDRC could not have come 
to a conclusion that the condition of forfeiture of 20% of BSP, being 
the earnest money liable for forfeiture in case of cancellation, was 
unreasonable and interfered with the same by reducing it to 10% 
of the BSP.
6.	
He further submits that, from the perusal of the email addressed 
by the Respondents to the Appellant, it was clear that though the 
Appellant had called upon the Respondents to take possession of the 
Apartment, they had opted out of the deal only because there was 
a recession in the market. He submits that since the Respondents 
themselves have cancelled the deal on account of recession in 
the market, the Appellant was fully justified in forfeiting the earnest 
money deposit. 
7.	
He relies on the judgments of this Court in the cases of Satish Batra 
v. Sudhir Rawal1 and Desh Raj and others v. Rohtash Singh2 in 
support of his submissions.
8.	
Per contra, Shri Ashwarya Sinha, learned counsel for the 
Respondents, relying on the judgments of the NCDRC in the cases 
of Komal Aggarwal v. Godrej Projects Development Ltd.3, DLF 
Ltd. v. Bhagwanti Narula4 and Ramesh Malhotra and Another v. 
Emaar Mgf Land Limited and Another5, submits that the NCDRC 
has consistently held that the condition of forfeiture of 20% of the 
BSP was not reasonable and reduced it to 10% of the BSP. 
9.	
He further relying on the judgments of this Court in the cases of 
Ireo Grace Realtech Private Limited v. Abhishek Khanna and 
others6 and Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Limited v. 
1	
(2013) 1 SCC 345
2	
(2023) 3 SCC 714
3	
Consumer Case No.2139 of 2018 dated 9.11.2022
4	
2015 SCC OnLine NCDRC 1613
5	
2020 SCC OnLine NCDRC 789
6	
(2021) 3 SCC 241
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
349
Godrej Projects Development Limited v. Anil Karlekar & Ors.
Govindan Raghavan7 submits that the condition of forfeiture of 20% 
of the BSP was one-sided and unconscionable and, therefore, not 
enforceable in law. 
10.	 He lastly relying on “The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) 
Act, 2016” and “The Haryana Real Estate Regulatory Authority 
Gurugram (Forfeiture of earnest money by the builder) 
Regulations, 2018”, submits that in view of the aforesaid Act and 
Regulations, the forfeiture of earnest money deposit cannot be more 
than 10% of the BSP. 
11.	 In the present case, it is not in dispute that the Complainants had 
booked an Apartment with the Appellant for BSP of Rs.1,70,81,400/- 
on 10th January 2014. Accordingly, an Agreement was entered into 
between the Appellant and the Complainants on 20th June 2014. 
The Complainants were also allotted an Apartment on the 14th Floor 
in Tower ‘C’ on 20th June 2014. On 20th June 2017, the Appellant 
received the Occupation Certificate. On 28th June, 2017, the Appellant 
issued an intimation to the Respondents calling upon them to take 
possession. However, instead of taking possession, by email dated 
22nd August 2017/31st August 2017, the Respondents refused to take 
possession and sought cancellation.
12.	 The Appellant vide communication dated 1st September 2017 informed 
the Respondents that out of the amount deposited by the Respondents, 
the Respondents were entitled to refund of Rs.4,22,845/-. However, 
the Respondents filed a complaint seeking refund of an amount of 
Rs.51,12,310/- along with other ancillary reliefs. The NCDRC, as 
aforesaid, passed the impugned order. 
13.	 It will be relevant to refer to clauses 2.6 and 8.4 of the Agreement 
entered into between the Parties, which read thus:
“2.6	 It has been specifically agreed between the Parties 
that, 20% of the Basic Sale Price, shall be considered and 
treated as earnest money under this Agreement (“Earnest 
Money”), to ensure the performance, compliance and 
fulfillment of the obligations and responsibilities of the 
Buyer under this Agreement.
7	
(2019) 5 SCC 725
350
It has been made clear by the Developer and the Buyer 
has understood that the Sale Consideration and Statutory 
Charges as mentioned in Schedule VI hereto have 
been computed on the basis of Super Built Up Area of 
the Apartment. The Buyer agrees that the calculation 
of Super Built Up Area in respect of the Apartment is 
tentative at this stage and subject to variations till the 
Completion of Construction. In case such variations 
are beyond +/- 5%, then the Developer shall take prior 
consent of the Buyer.
***
***
***
8.4 On and from the date of such termination on account of 
Buyer’s Event of Default as mentioned above (“Termination 
Date”), the Parties mutually agree that-
(i) The Developer shall, out of the entire amounts paid by 
the Buyer to the Developer till the Termination Date, forfeit 
the entire Earnest Money and any other dues payable 
by the Buyer including interest on delayed payments as 
specified in this Agreement.
(ii) After the said forfeiture, the Developer shall refund the 
balance amount to the Buyer or to his banker/financial 
institution, as the case may be, without any interest;
(iii) On and from the Termination Date, the Buyer shall 
be left with no right, title, interest, claim, lien, authority 
whatsoever either in respect of the Apartment or under 
this Agreement and the Developer shall be released and 
discharged of all its liabilities and obligations under this 
Agreement.
(iv) On and from the Termination Date, the Developer 
shall be entitled, without any claim or interference of 
the Buyer, to convey, sell, transfer and/or assign the 
Apartment in favour of third party(ies) or otherwise deal 
with it as the Developer may deem fit and appropriate, in 
such a manner that this Agreement was never executed 
and without any claim of the Buyer to any sale proceeds 
of such conveyance, sale, transfer and/or assignment of 
the Apartment in favour of third party(ies).” 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
351
Godrej Projects Development Limited v. Anil Karlekar & Ors.
14.	 It can thus be seen that as per the Agreement between the Parties, 
the Complainants were required to pay earnest money deposit of 
20% of the BSP, which undisputedly has been paid. As per clause 
8.4, on termination on account of Buyer’s Event of Default, the 
Developer was entitled to forfeit the entire earnest money deposit 
and other dues including interest on delayed payments as specified 
in the Agreement. 
15.	 Undisputedly, only upon the Appellant calling upon the Respondents 
to take possession, the Respondents informed the Appellant vide 
email dated 22nd August 2017 as under:
“Some of the promised connections from internal roads to 
externals have been abandoned. Overall the place falls to 
invite you, entice your And the most painful part is the fact 
that the market prices have sharply fallen and a similar 
flat to a new buyer is available at a substantially lower 
price, not only in secondary market but even by Godrej 
themselves. This is unfair, and one feels cheated that an 
old customer of 4 years is a loser compared to the new 
one. Under the circumstances, am pained to state that I 
want to cancel my booking of the said flat and demand 
that the amount paid till date be refunded along with 
applicable interest. We shall appreciate a prompt action 
on our request. Kindly share the cancellation formalities, 
and the refund amount.”
16.	 The stand taken by the Respondents was specifically borne out by 
the NCDRC from the written statement filed by the Appellant. 
17.	 It is thus clear that the Respondents had cancelled the deal since 
there was recession in the market. Not only that, but the NCDRC 
has specifically observed as under:
“Hence, the action of the OPs in cancelling the apartment 
and forfeiting the amount as per terms and conditions of 
the application form and/or the BBA cannot be faulted 
with. However, the condition of forfeiture of 20% of BSP, 
being the earnest money liable for forfeiture in case of 
cancellation appears unreasonable. It will be in the interest 
of justice and fair play to both sides, if OPs are allowed 
to deduct only 10% of the BSP as earnest money i.e. 
352
Rs.17,08,140/- and refund the balance amount to the 
complainants.”
18.	 This Court in the case of Satish Batra v. Sudhir Rawal (supra), 
after considering the earlier judgments of this Court, has observed 
thus:
“15. The law is, therefore, clear that to justify the forfeiture 
of advance money being part of “earnest money” the 
terms of the contract should be clear and explicit. Earnest 
money is paid or given at the time when the contract is 
entered into and, as a pledge for its due performance by 
the depositor to be forfeited in case of non-performance 
by the depositor. There can be converse situation also 
that if the seller fails to perform the contract the purchaser 
can also get double the amount, if it is so stipulated. 
It is also the law that part-payment of purchase price 
cannot be forfeited unless it is a guarantee for the due 
performance of the contract. In other words, if the payment 
is made only towards part-payment of consideration and 
not intended as earnest money then the forfeiture clause 
will not apply.
16. When we examine the clauses in the instant case, 
it is amply clear that the clause extracted hereinabove 
was included in the contract at the moment at which the 
contract was entered into. It represents the guarantee that 
the contract would be fulfilled. In other words, “earnest” is 
given to bind the contract, which is a part of the purchase 
price when the transaction is carried out and it will be 
forfeited when the transaction falls through by reason of 
the default or failure of the purchaser. There is no other 
clause that militates against the clauses extracted in the 
agreement dated 29-11-2011.
17.  We are, therefore, of the view that the seller was 
justified in forfeiting the amount of Rs 7,00,000 as per the 
relevant clause, since the earnest money was primarily a 
security for the due performance of the agreement and, 
consequently, the seller is entitled to forfeit the entire 
deposit. The High Court has, therefore, committed an error 
in reversing the judgment of the trial court.”
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
353
Godrej Projects Development Limited v. Anil Karlekar & Ors.
19.	 This Court has held that to justify the forfeiture of advance money 
being part of “earnest money” the terms of the contract should be 
clear and explicit. It has been observed that the earnest money is 
paid or given at the time when the contract is entered into and, as 
a pledge for its due performance by the depositor to be forfeited 
in case of non-performance by the depositor. However, this Court 
clarified that if the payment is made only towards part-payment of 
consideration and not intended as earnest money then the forfeiture 
clause will not apply.
20.	 Recently, this Court in the case of Desh Raj and others (supra), 
after considering the earlier judgments, has reiterated the aforesaid 
legal position. 
21.	 We, therefore, find that Shri Dhruv Mehta, learned Senior Counsel is 
justified in placing reliance on the aforesaid judgments of this Court. 
22.	 However, the issue does not rest at that. It will be relevant to consider 
the reciprocal obligations of the Appellant i.e., the Developer in case 
the Developer does not comply with the timelines in the Agreement. 
Clauses 4.2 and 4.3 of the Agreement are as follows:
“4.2. The Apartment shall be ready for occupation within 
42 months from the date of issuance of Allotment Letter. 
(“Tentative Completion Date”), however the Developer is 
entitled for a grace period of 6 months over and above 
this 42 month’s period. Upon the Apartment being ready 
for possession and occupation the Developer shall issue 
the Possession Notice to the Buyer of the Apartment. 
Notwithstanding the above, the Developer shall be entitled 
to an extension of time from the Tentative Completion Date 
for issue of the Possession Notice, if the Completion of 
Construction of the said Apartment or the part/portion of 
the Project where the said Apartment is situated is delayed 
on account of any of the following reasons –
(i)	
Non-availability of steel, cement, other building materials, 
water or electric supply or labour, or 
(ii)	
Any change in the Applicable Law or existence of any 
injunction, stay order, prohibitory order or directions passed 
by any Court, Tribunal, Body or Competent Authority; or 
354
(iii)	 Delay in securing any permission, Approvals, NOC, 
sanction building plan, building completion and/or 
occupation certificate, water, electricity, drainage or 
sewerage connection from the Competent Authority for 
reasons beyond the control of the Developer, or 
(iv)	 Force Majeure Event or any other reason (not limited to 
the reasons mentioned above) beyond the control of or 
unforeseen by the Developer, which may prevent, restrict, 
interrupt or interfere with or delay the construction of Project 
on the Subject Lands or which may prevent the Developer 
in performing its obligations under this Agreement; 
In case there are is any delay on account of the aforesaid 
reasons, the Developer shall keep the Buyer fully informed 
about the same along with a revised tentative date of 
possession. 
4.3. 	Subject to the provisions of Clause 4.2 herein above, 
in the event the Developer fails or neglects to issue the 
Possession Notice on or before the Tentative Completion 
Date and/or on such date as may be extended by mutual 
consent of the Parties, then the Developer shall be liable 
to pay to the Buyer a compensation for the entire period 
of such delay computed at the rate of Rs. 5/- (Rupees 
Five only) per month per square feet of the Super Built 
Up Area of the Apartment. 
In the alternative, the Developer, at the request of the 
Buyer, may refund the total amounts already received in 
respect of the said Apartment together with simple interest 
at the rate of 15% per annum to the Buyer. It has been 
agreed between the Parties that upon such repayment, the 
Agreement shall stand terminated and the Buyer shall not 
be entitled to claim any loss and/or damages whatsoever. 
The said refund by the Developer to the Buyer, sent through 
cheque/demand draft by registered post acknowledgement 
due or by courier at the address of the Buyer mentioned 
herein, shall be full and final satisfaction and settlement of 
all claims of the Buyer under this Agreement, irrespective 
of whether the Buyer accepts/encashes the said cheque/
demand draft or not. Thereafter the Buyer shall cease to 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
355
Godrej Projects Development Limited v. Anil Karlekar & Ors.
have any interest or claim on the said Apartment and the 
proportionate undivided interest in the Common Areas 
and Facilities and Limited Common Areas and Facilities 
whatsoever or howsoever. The Developer thereafter shall 
be entitled to sell the said Apartment along with undivided 
interest in the Common Areas and Facilities and Limited 
Common Areas and Facilities to any prospective buyer/
third party of its choice.”
23.	 If we consider the obligations of the Developer in the event it does 
not comply with the timelines, a very meagre compensation is 
provided to the Apartment purchaser. Not only that clause 4.2 of 
the Agreement, which provides that the Apartment shall be ready for 
occupation within 42 months from the date of issuance of Allotment 
Letter, also provides that the Developer would be entitled for a grace 
period of 6 months over and above this 42 months’ period. The said 
clause 4.2 further provides for various eventualities in case of which 
the Developer would be entitled to further extension of period for 
handing over the possession. 
24.	 In any case, clause 4.3 of the Agreement provides that, subject 
to the provisions of clause 4.2 of the Agreement, if the Developer 
fails or neglects to issue the Possession Notice on or before the 
Tentative Completion Date and/or on such date as may be extended 
by mutual consent of the Parties, the Developer shall be liable to 
pay to the Buyer a meagre compensation for such a delay at the 
rate of Rs.5/- per month per square feet of the Super Built Up Area 
of the Apartment.
25.	 It can thus be seen that the Agreement is one-sided and totally tilted 
in favour of the Developer. 
26.	 In the case of Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited 
and Another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and Another8, this Court, by 
taking recourse to Article 14 of the Constitution of India, has held that 
the courts will not enforce an unfair and unreasonable contract or an 
unfair and unreasonable clause in a contract, entered into between 
Parties who are not equal in bargaining power. It will be relevant 
to refer to the following observations of this Court in the said case:
8	
(1986) 3 SCC 156
356
“89. ……We have a Constitution for our country. Our judges 
are bound by their oath to “uphold the Constitution and 
the laws”. The Constitution was enacted to secure to all 
the citizens of this country social and economic justice. 
Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees to all persons 
equality before the law and the equal protection of the 
laws. The principle deducible from the above discussions 
on this part of the case is in consonance with right and 
reason, intended to secure social and economic justice and 
conforms to the mandate of the great equality clause in 
Article 14. This principle is that the courts will not enforce 
and will, when called upon to do so, strike down an unfair 
and unreasonable contract, or an unfair and unreasonable 
clause in a contract, entered into between parties who 
are not equal in bargaining power. It is difficult to give 
an exhaustive list of all bargains of this type. No court 
can visualize the different situations which can arise in 
the affairs of men. One can only attempt to give some 
illustrations. For instance, the above principle will apply 
where the inequality of bargaining power is the result of the 
great disparity in the economic strength of the contracting 
parties. It will apply where the inequality is the result of 
circumstances, whether of the creation of the parties or 
not. It will apply to situations in which the weaker party is 
in a position in which he can obtain goods or services or 
means of livelihood only upon the terms imposed by the 
stronger party or go without them. It will also apply where 
a man has no choice, or rather no meaningful choice, but 
to give his assent to a contract or to sign on the dotted 
line in a prescribed or standard form or to accept a set of 
rules as part of the contract, however unfair, unreasonable 
and unconscionable a clause in that contract or form or 
rules may be. This principle, however, will not apply where 
the bargaining power of the contracting parties is equal 
or almost equal. This principle may not apply where both 
parties are businessmen and the contract is a commercial 
transaction.”
27.	 This Court in the case of Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure 
Limited (supra) was considering similar clauses in an Agreement 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
357
Godrej Projects Development Limited v. Anil Karlekar & Ors.
between a Developer and an Apartment Purchaser. This Court 
observed thus:
“6.4. A perusal of the apartment buyer’s agreement dated 
8-5-2012 reveals stark incongruities between the remedies 
available to both the parties. For instance, Clause 6.4(ii) 
of the agreement entitles the appellant builder to charge 
interest @18% p.a. on account of any delay in payment 
of instalments from the respondent flat purchaser. Clause 
6.4(iii) of the agreement entitles the appellant builder to 
cancel the allotment and terminate the agreement, if any 
instalment remains in arrears for more than 30 days. On 
the other hand, as per Clause 11.5 of the agreement, if 
the appellant builder fails to deliver possession of the 
apartment within the stipulated period, the respondent flat 
purchaser has to wait for a period of 12 months after the 
end of the grace period, before serving a termination notice 
of 90 days on the appellant builder, and even thereafter, 
the appellant builder gets 90 days to refund only the actual 
instalment paid by the respondent flat purchaser, after 
adjusting the taxes paid, interest and penalty on delayed 
payments. In case of any delay thereafter, the appellant 
builder is liable to pay interest @9% p.a. only.
6.5. Another instance is Clause 23.4 of the agreement 
which entitles the appellant builder to serve a termination 
notice upon the respondent flat purchaser for breach of 
any contractual obligation. If the respondent flat purchaser 
fails to rectify the default within 30 days of the termination 
notice, then the agreement automatically stands cancelled, 
and the appellant builder has the right to forfeit the entire 
amount of earnest money towards liquidated damages. On 
the other hand, as per Clause 11.5(v) of the agreement, if 
the respondent flat purchaser fails to exercise his right of 
termination within the time limit provided in Clause 11.5, 
then he shall not be entitled to terminate the agreement 
thereafter, and shall be bound by the provisions of the 
agreement.
6.6. Section 2(1)(r) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 
defines “unfair trade practices” in the following words:
358
“2.(1)(r) “unfair trade practice” means a trade practice 
which, for the purpose of promoting the sale, use or supply 
of any goods or for the provision of any service, adopts 
any unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice.…”,
and includes any of the practices enumerated therein. The 
provision is illustrative, and not exhaustive.
xxx
xxx
xxx
6.8. A term of a contract will not be final and binding if it 
is shown that the flat purchasers had no option but to sign 
on the dotted line, on a contract framed by the builder. 
The contractual terms of the agreement dated 8-5-2012 
are ex facie one-sided, unfair and unreasonable. The 
incorporation of such one-sided clauses in an agreement 
constitutes an unfair trade practice as per Section 2(1)
(r) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 since it adopts 
unfair methods or practices for the purpose of selling the 
flats by the builder.
7. In view of the above discussion, we have no hesitation in 
holding that the terms of the apartment buyer›s agreement 
dated 8-5-2012 were wholly one-sided and unfair to the 
respondent flat purchaser. The appellant builder could 
not seek to bind the respondent with such one-sided 
contractual terms.”
28.	 The view taken by this Court in the case of Pioneer Urban Land 
and Infrastructure Limited (supra) was followed in the case of 
Wing Commander Arifur Rahman Khan and Aleya Sultana and 
others v. DLF Southern Homes Private Limited (Now Known as 
Begur OMR Homes Private Limited) and others9.
29.	 Further, a three-judge Bench of this Court in the case of Ireo Grace 
Realtech Private Limited (supra) approved the legal position as 
laid down in the case of Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure 
Limited (supra). 
30.	 It is further to be noted that when the cases of Pioneer Urban Land 
and Infrastructure Limited (supra), Wing Commander Arifur 
9	
(2020) 16 SCC 512
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
359
Godrej Projects Development Limited v. Anil Karlekar & Ors.
Rahman Khan and Aleya Sultana and others (supra) and Ireo 
Grace Realtech Private Limited (supra) were decided, they were 
decided based on the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 
1986. Relying on the provisions of Section 2(1)(r) of the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986, which defines the term “unfair trade practice”, 
this Court held that the contractual terms which are ex facie one-
sided, unfair and unreasonable would constitute unfair trade practice 
as per the aforesaid definition of “unfair trade practice”.
31.	 Now, Parliament in 2019 has enacted the Consumer Protection Act, 
2019, which has specifically provided a definition for “unfair contract”. 
It will be apposite to refer to the relevant part of clause (46) of Section 
2 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, which reads thus:
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,-
xxx
xxx
xxx
(46)	 “unfair contract” means a contract between a 
manufacturer or trader or service provider on one hand, 
and a consumer on the other, having such terms which 
cause significant change in the rights of such consumer, 
including the following, namely:-
(i)	
requiring manifestly excessive security deposits 
to be given by a consumer for the performance of 
contractual obligations; or 
(ii)	
imposing any penalty on the consumer, for the breach 
of contract thereof which is wholly disproportionate 
to the loss occurred due to such breach to the other 
party to the contract; or 
xxx
xxx
xxx
(vi)	 imposing on the consumer any unreasonable charge, 
obligation or condition which puts such consumer to 
disadvantage;”
32.	 No doubt that the aforesaid definition would be applicable after the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 came into effect, however, even prior 
to that while considering the term “unfair trade practice”, this Court 
has found that such one-sided Agreements, as in the present case, 
would be covered by the definition of term “unfair trade practice”. 
360
33.	 Insofar as the judgment in the case of Satish Batra (supra) is 
concerned, the clause providing for “forfeiture of earnest money 
deposit” cannot be said to be one-sided. It will be relevant to refer to 
the term which fell for consideration before this Court in the aforesaid 
case, which reads thus:
“(e) If the prospective purchaser fails to fulfil the above 
condition, the transaction shall stand cancelled and 
earnest money will be forfeited. In case I fail to complete 
the transaction as stipulated above, the purchaser will 
get  double  the amount of the earnest money. In both 
conditions, the dealer will get 4% commission from the 
faulting party.”
34.	 It can thus be seen that in the aforesaid case though the term in 
the Agreement provided for forfeiture of the earnest money in the 
event the prospective purchaser fails to fulfill the conditions, it also 
provided for payment of double the amount of earnest money by 
the vendor to the purchaser in case the vendor fails to complete the 
transaction. As such, the said term cannot be said to be one-sided. 
35.	 Similarly, in the case of Desh Raj and others (supra), this Court 
was considering an Agreement to Sell with respect to the landed 
property. A perusal of the judgment would reveal that it was a case 
of an Agreement between two equal Parties and there are no terms 
in the Agreement which could be said to be one-sided and tilted 
totally in favour of one of the Parties. 
36.	 We are, therefore, of the view that the present case would not be 
governed by the law laid down by this Court in the cases of Satish 
Batra (supra) and Desh Raj and others (supra), but would be 
governed by the law as laid down in the cases of Pioneer Urban 
Land and Infrastructure Limited (supra), Wing Commander Arifur 
Rahman Khan and Aleya Sultana and others (supra) and Ireo 
Grace Realtech Private Limited (supra).
37.	 It will further be relevant to refer to the following observations by a 
Bench consisting of three learned Judges of this Court in the case 
of Maula Bux v. Union of India10:
10	
(1969) 2 SCC 554
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
361
Godrej Projects Development Limited v. Anil Karlekar & Ors.
5.  Forfeiture of earnest money under a contract for 
sale of property — Movable or immovable — If the 
amount is reasonable, does not fall within Section 
74. That has been decided in several cases: Chiranjit 
Singh  v.  Har Swarup;  Roshan Lal  v.  Delhi Cloth and 
General Mills Company Ltd. Delhi  [1910 SCC OnLine 
All 98 : ILR (1911) 33 All 166]; Mohd Habibullah v. Mohd 
Shafi [1919 SCC OnLine All 87 : ILR 41 All 324]; Bishan 
Chand v. Radhakishan Das. [1897 SCC OnLine All 52 : 
ILR (1897) 19 All 490] These cases are easily explained, 
for forfeiture of reasonable amount paid as earnest money 
does not amount to imposing a penalty. But if forfeiture 
is of the nature of penalty. Section 74 applies. Where 
under the terms of the contract the party in breach has 
undertaken to pay a sum of money or to forfeit a sum of 
money which he has already paid to the party complaining 
of a breach of contract, the undertaking is of the nature 
of a penalty.”
38.	 It can be seen that this Court has held that if the forfeiture of earnest 
money under a contract is reasonable, then it does not fall within 
Section 74 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, inasmuch as, such a 
forfeiture does not amount to imposing a penalty. It has further been 
held that, however, if the forfeiture is of the nature of penalty, then 
Section 74 would be applicable. This Court has further held that 
under the terms of the contract, if the party in breach undertook 
to pay a sum of money or to forfeit a sum of money which he had 
already paid to the party complaining of a breach of contract, the 
undertaking is of the nature of a penalty.
39.	 Relying on the aforesaid observations of this Court, the NCDRC, 
in a series of cases right from the year 2015, has held that 10% of 
the BSP is a reasonable amount which is liable to be forfeited as 
earnest money. The NCDRC has initially taken this view in the case 
of DLF Ltd. v. Bhagwanti Narula (supra). The said view has been 
followed subsequently in various judgments of the NCDRC. We see 
no reason to upset the view consistently taken by the NCDRC based 
on the judgment of this Court in the case of Maula Bux (supra).
40.	 Though we are not inclined to interfere with the direction of the 
NCDRC for refund of the amount in excess of 10% of the BSP, we 
362
however find that the NCDRC was not justified in awarding interest 
on the amount to be refunded.
41.	 As has been pointed out herein above, after the Agreement was 
entered into between the Parties in the year 2014, only after the 
possession was offered by the Appellant to the Respondents, they 
sought cancellation of the allotment. The reason given by them is that 
on account of sharp decline in the prices, a person would be able 
to buy a flat at a substantially lower price even in Primary market.
42.	 It is quite probable that the Respondents would have utilised the 
money which was payable by them to the Appellant for purchasing 
another property at a lower rate.
43.	 In the facts and circumstances, therefore, we find that the NCDRC 
was not justified in awarding interest on the amount to be refunded 
by the Appellant. 
44.	 In pursuance of our order dated 24th April 2023, the Appellant has 
refunded an amount of Rs.22,01,215/- to the Respondents. After 
deducting an amount of Rs.17,08,140/- (i.e. 10% of the BSP) from 
Rs.51,12,310/- (amount paid by the Respondents to the Appellant), 
the amount comes to Rs.34,04,170/-. The Appellant is, therefore, 
required to pay balance amount of Rs.12,02,955/- [Rs.34,04,170/- 
minus Rs.22,01,215/-] to the Respondents. We, therefore, direct the 
Appellant to pay the said amount of Rs.12,02,955/- to the respondents 
within a period of six weeks from today. 
45.	 The appeal is partly allowed in the above terms. 
46.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan