[2025] 6 S.C.R. 210 : 2025 INSC 632
Saroj Salkan 
v. 
Huma Singh & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 6389 of 2025)
06 May 2025
[Sanjay Karol and Manmohan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to the correctness of the dismissal of the partition 
suit u/Ord.XII r.6 CPC by the Single Judge of the High Court 
based on the admission, and that too on its own motion without 
an application being filed by the other party.
Headnotes†
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – Ord.XII r.6, Ord.VII r.11 – 
Judgment on admissions – Suit filed by the appellant u/s.6 of 
the 1956 Act for partition, injunction and accounts involving 
five properties, held by the appellant’s father against the legal 
heirs of appellant’s brother and his sister-respondent no. 6 – 
Parties previously involved in declaratory suits regarding the 
properties – After completion of pleadings when the partition 
suit was listed for framing of issues, the Single Judge passed 
a decree dismissing the partition suit u/Ord.XII r.6 observing 
that no cause of action arises – Division Bench upheld the 
decree – Correctness:
Held: Submission that the Single Judge could have dismissed 
the suit u/Ord.VII r.11 alone and not u/Ord.XII r.6 and that too 
without any application being filed by the respondents is untenable 
in law – Ord.XII r.6 gives a very wide discretion to the Court to 
pass a judgment at any stage of the suit and that too on its own 
motion, without any application being filed by any party – Ord.
XII r.6 authorises the Court to not only pass a decree regarding 
admitted claim, but also to dismiss the suit – On facts, the effect 
of the decrees in the declaratory suits, was that the appellant 
cannot go behind them in the present proceedings – Respondent 
no.6-sister estopped from contending that property B is owned 
* Author
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
211
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
by a co-parcenary/HUF of which she is a member – Furthrmore, 
proviso to sub-section 1 of amended s.6 of the 1956 attracted 
to the instant case and submission by appellant and respondent 
no.6 with respect to s. 6 not applicable to the instant case – Also 
the suit to the extent it challenges ownership of Anand Niketan 
house is barred by limitation – Order passed by the High Courts 
upheld – Hindu Succession Act, 1956. [Paras 36-49]
Case Law Cited
Uttam Singh Duggal & Co. Ltd. v. United Bank of India [2000] 
Supp. 2 SCR 187 : (2000) 7 SCC 120; Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao 
Patil v. K. Madan Mohan Rao [2023] 9 SCR 1218 : 2023 SCC 
OnLine SC 871; Vineeta Sharma v. Rakesh Sharma and Ors. 
[2020] 10 SCR 135 : (2020) 9 SCC 1; Maria Margarida Sequeira 
Fernandes & Ors v. Erasmo Jack De Sequeira (D) Tr. Lrs. & Ors. 
[2012] 3 SCR 841 : (2012) 5 SCC 370; Rajiv Ghosh v. Satya 
Naryan Jaiswal, Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 9975 of 2025; 
ITDC Limited v. Chander Pal Sood and Son (2000) 84 DLT 337 
(DB); Kalyani (Dead) by LRs. v. Narayanan [1980] SCR 1130 : 
(1980) Supp. SCC 298 – referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
Mayne’s Hindu Law, 11th Edition, p. 347 – referred to. 
List of Acts
Code of Civil Procedure, 1973; Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
List of Keywords
Partition; Dismissal of suit; Consensual decree; Self acquired 
property; Co-parcenery; Hindu Undivided Family; HUF; Joint Hindu 
family; Dismissal of the partition suit; Judgment on admissions; 
Declaratory suits; Partition suit listed for framing of issues; Cause 
of action; Limitation.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 6389 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 15.11.2022 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in RFA (OS) No. 51 of 2016
212
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Dushyant Dave, Sr. Adv., Shubhankar Sengupta, Aarush Bhatia, 
Ms. Anindita Mitra.
Advs. for the Respondents:
P.S. Patwalia, Sr. Adv., Nidhesh Gupta, Sr. Adv., Sameer Singh, 
Ms. Neelam Singh, Purushottam Sharma Tripathi, Ms. Vani Vyas, 
Prakhar Singh, Narendra Prabhakar, Gopal Jha, Nimish Arjaria, 
Umesh Kumar Yadav, Shubhankar Sen Gupta, Aarush Bhatia, 
Sanjay Kumar Singh, M/S. Vachher And Agrud, Sameer Rohatgi, 
Sumit Kumar Sharma, Rajat Sangwan, Ms. Shehla Chaudhary, Md. 
Anas Chaudhary, Mohd. Sharyab Ali, Ansar Ahmad Chaudhary, 
Kartikey Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Manmohan, J
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The present Appeal has been filed challenging the impugned 
judgment and final order dated 15th November, 2022 passed by the 
High Court of Delhi in RFA (OS) No. 51/2016, whereby the Division 
Bench dismissed the appeal and upheld the Decree dated 5th May, 
2016 passed by the learned Single Judge in CS(OS) No. 683/2007 
dismissing the partition suit under Order XII Rule 6 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (“CPC’) with liberty to approach the competent 
Court at Sonepat, Haryana for partition of land situated in Barota.
3.	
The subject suit was filed by the Appellant-plaintiff under Section 6 of 
the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 for partition, injunction and accounts 
involving five properties held by the Appellant-plaintiff’s father – Late 
Major General Budh Singh against the legal heirs of Anup Singh i.e. 
brother of Appellant-plaintiff and her sister, Respondent No.6, who 
is supporting the case of the Appellant-plaintiff. The five properties 
that were made the subject matter of the suit for partition were:-
(a)	 Barota Land (72 acres approx. with farmhouse)
(b)	 Agriculture land – 11 acres at Kalupur, Sonepat
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
213
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
(c)	
8 Bigha of Dairy Plot at Sonepat
(d)	 Bhatgaon Land (30 acres of houses, outhouses and orchard)
(e)	 C-38, Anand Niketan, New Delhi. 
4.	
The pedigree table of the family, for quick reference is as under: 
Major General Budh Singh (died on 08.11.1988)
Son (Anup Singh) 
(died on 18.08.1989) 
Wife 
(Sneh Lata) 
Died in  
June 2024
Son 
(Sanjeev Singh) 
(Died)
Wife 
(Uma Singh) 
[R-1]
Son 
(Rajeev Singh) 
[R-2]
Daughter 
(Renu Singh) 
[R-3]
Daughter 
(Madhu Eggbert) 
[R-4]
Daughter 
(Anju Singh) 
[R-5]
Daughter (Saroj Salkan) 
[Appellant-Plaintiff]
Daughter (Sharda Hooda) 
[R-6]
5.	
After completion of pleadings when the partition suit was listed 
for framing of issues, the learned Single Judge passed a decree 
of dismissal of the suit observing ‘as per admitted pleadings and 
documents no cause of action arises, no issues are required to be 
framed and accordingly I exercise my powers under Order XII Rule 
6 CPC to pass a decree; decree includes dismissal of a suit…’. The 
relevant portion of the impugned order passed by the learned Single 
Judge is reproduced hereinbelow:-
“11. Accordingly, the following conclusions can be derived 
on the basis of the pleadings and the admitted documents 
on record:—
(i) In the subject suit for partition, and properties whereof 
are stated in para 2 of the plaint, as regards the properties 
stated in para 2(b) and 2(c), no details of these properties 
have been provided as required by Order VII Rule 1, Order 
VII Rule 3 read with Order VI Rule 4 CPC, and hence 
214
Supreme Court Reports
the suit plaint is not maintainable for seeking partition 
of these properties which are alleged to exist, but which 
really do not exist. This aspect is to be taken note of with 
the fact that no documents whatsoever have been filed 
by the plaintiff (assuming such documents form part of 
the pleadings) which will give the municipal number or 
the revenue numbers or the areas of these properties. 
Suit is therefore liable to be and is accordingly dismissed 
for properties stated in para 2(b) and 2(c) of the plaint 
being the properties situated at Kalupur and dairy plot at 
Sonepat in Haryana.
(ii) The plaint and the replication as they stand allege 
existence of HUF and its properties on account of late Gen. 
Budh Singh having acquired ancestral properties but not 
only no details are pleaded/given of which are the specific 
ancestral properties which are acquired by late Gen. Budh 
Singh, and also it is further not pleaded as to which of 
these specific properties were inherited by late Gen. Budh 
Singh prior to 1956. Once there do not exist averments 
of inheritance of specific properties by Gen. Budh Singh 
prior to 1956, no HUF of these properties can be said to 
exist of having come into existence prior to 1956.
(iii) The only other way thereafter that HUF and its 
properties could exist is if Gen. Budh Singh who inherited 
ancestral properties had thrown the properties into a 
common hotchpotch, but that too is not the case as set 
out in the plaint of HUF and its properties being created 
on account of late Gen. Budh Singh throwing the property 
or properties into common hotchpotch.
(iv) Challenge by the plaintiff to the Judgment and Decree 
dated 8.3.1977 passed in suit no. 66/1977 on the ground 
that this decree is collusive and not binding is liable to fail 
by virtue of Article 59 of the Limitation Act, 1963 inasmuch 
as challenge in the year 2007 to a judgment and decree 
passed 30 years back on 8.3.1977 is hopelessly barred 
by limitation.
(v) So far as the property at C-38, Anand Niketan is 
concerned, once title deeds of this property are admittedly 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
215
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
in the name of late Sh. Anup Singh (and who is now 
represented by his legal heirs, defendant nos. 1 to 5), the 
suit is barred by Section 4(1) of the Benami Act read with 
the fact that no sufficient pleadings exist for existence of 
HUF and its properties and of the property at C-38, being 
an HUF property.
(vi) So far as the land situated at Barota, Sonepat is 
concerned and with respect to which the case of the 
defendant is that late Gen. Budh Singh died leaving 
behind his Will dated 3.11.1987 and this Will is disputed 
by the plaintiff, I need not examine the merits of the matter 
because the suit land is situated at Sonepat, Haryana and 
therefore in view of Section 16 CPC, suit for this land at 
Barota, Sonepat on the cause of action that father was the 
exclusive owner of this property and who died intestate 
and hence plaintiff as a legal heir will inherit a share in 
the properties of the father will have to be dealt with and 
decided by the competent court at Sonepat, Haryana.”
6.	
The appeal filed by the Appellant-plaintiff was dismissed by the 
Division Bench vide judgment and order dated 11th October, 2022. 
The relevant portion of judgment and order passed by the Division 
Bench is reproduced hereinbelow:- 
“16. Barring aforesaid, learned counsel for appellant has 
neither pleaded nor advanced any arguments nor thrown 
any light over the legal position nor cited any case laws 
regarding any of the issues/grounds, especially the relevant 
quoted provisions of the Code and the Limitation Act, 
recourse whereto form the very basis of dismissal of suit 
of appellant by the learned Single Judge under Order XII 
rule 6 of the Code vide the impugned judgment. In support 
of her contentions, though learned counsel for appellant 
has relied upon more than 30 judgments with respect to the 
law expounded qua HUF, ancestral property, coparcenary, 
joint family property, so on and so forth but we are afraid 
the learned counsel for appellant has failed to draw our 
attention or cite any law regarding the two fundamental 
issues of pleadings and limitation for maintainability of the 
present appeal. Appellant, thus failing to cross over the 
216
Supreme Court Reports
main obstacles is unable to counter the basic essence of 
the impugned judgment…”
SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF APPELLANT-PLAINTIFF
7.	
Mr. Dushyant Dave, learned senior counsel for the Appellant-plaintiff 
submitted that the impugned judgment dated 05th May 2016 was 
untenable in law, inasmuch as, the learned Single Judge had 
dismissed the partition suit under Order XII Rule 6 CPC. He submitted 
that the plaint could have been rejected and the suit dismissed under 
Order VII Rule 11 CPC alone. He further submitted that the learned 
Single Judge could not have dismissed the suit under Order XII Rule 
6 CPC and that too on its own motion without an application being 
filed by the Respondents. In support of his submission, he relied upon 
the judgment of this Court in Uttam Singh Duggal & Co. Ltd. V. 
United Bank of India 2000 (7) SCC 120 and Bhim Rao Baswanth 
Rao Patil vs. K. Madan Mohan Rao 2023 SCC OnLine SC 871. 
The relevant portion of the judgment in Uttam Singh Duggal & Co. 
Ltd. (supra) is reproduced hereinbelow:-
“As to the object of Order 12 Rule 6, we need not say 
anything more than what the legislature itself has said when 
the saif provision came to be amended. In the Objects and 
Reasons set out while amending the said Rule, it is stated 
that “where a claim is admitted, the court has jurisdiction 
to enter a judgment for the plaintiff and to pass a decree 
on admitted claim. The object of the Rule is to enable the 
party to obtain a speedy judgment at least to the extent 
of the relief to which according to the admission of the 
defendant, the plaintiff is entitled”. We should not unduly 
narrow down the meaning of this Rule as the object is to 
enable a party to obtain speedy judgment. Where the other 
party has made a plain admission entitling the former to 
succeed, it should apply and also wherever there is a clear 
admission of facts in the face of which it is impossible for 
the party making such admission to succeed.”
8.	
He submitted that the learned Single Judge had committed a serious 
error in holding that a reading of the plaint did not show creation 
and existence of a Hindu Undivided Family (‘HUF’) of Late Major 
General Budh Singh prior to 1956. He emphasised that the plaint 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
217
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
clearly disclosed that the properties were ancestral in nature and 
were owned by the HUF of Late Major General Budh Singh. In 
support of his submission, he relied upon the judgments passed in 
four Suits filed among some of the parties at different points of time 
with respect to the five properties that were the subject matter of 
the present partition suit. 
9.	
He stated that the suit for declaration being Suit No. 671/1 of 1972 
(hereinafter referred to as “Suit I”) filed by the present Appellant along 
with her sister (Respondent No.6) and minor sons of their brother 
Anup Singh on 25th March, 1972 proceeded on the basis that the 
Barota and Bhatgaon lands were HUF properties. He stated that the 
Trial Court decreed that suit because Major General Budh Singh 
(Late father of Appellant-plaintiff, Respondent No.6 and Anup Singh 
himself) appeared and filed a written statement and so did Anup 
Singh accepting the claim of the plaintiffs therein. He emphasised that 
the Trial Court decreed Suit I on 06th April, 1972 declaring plaintiffs 
No. 1 to 4 to be owners in possession of the Barota land detailed 
against their name in para no.4 of the plaint and holding that Late 
Major General Budh Singh (defendant therein) has no right, title or 
interest in the same. 
10.	 Mr. Dave, learned senior counsel, stated that subsequently, a second 
suit being Suit No. 66/1977 (hereinafter referred to as “Suit II”) was 
filed by Late Major General Budh Singh against his daughters alone 
i.e. Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6 claiming Barota lands 
decreed in favour of his daughters to be his personal property, fearing 
that the lands may be declared excess land under the Haryana 
Land Ceiling Act. He pointed out that Suit II was predicated on the 
premise that the decree passed in Suit I was declared a nullity qua 
Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent no. 6 herein by Collector Surplus. 
11.	 He stated that the present Appellant-plaintiff and sister-Respondent 
No.6 filed a written statement in Suit II categorically averring that 
“Though the defendants got a decree in their favour in the year 1970 
regarding the land detailed in para No.1 of the plaint but no right or 
title was recognised or admitted by the our/us authorities and the 
plaintiff continued to be owner in possession of the said land and 
as such the decree of the Sub Judge Sonipat dated 7.4.72 was 
declared a nullity in the eyes of law and could not be accepted upon. 
The plaintiff continued to be owner in possession of the said land.”
218
Supreme Court Reports
12.	 He stated that the Trial Court passed a consensual decree in the 
said suit on 08th March, 1977 declaring the decree dated 04th March, 
1972 passed in Suit I as a nullity. He submitted that since Suit II 
had been decreed, therefore, the partition claimed under the Suit I 
did not, in any event, survive.
13.	 He emphasised that a third suit being Suit No. 219/1978 (hereinafter 
referred to as “Suit III”) was filed by Anup Singh against his own 
father categorically averring that Barota and Bhatgaon properties 
were ancestral properties and that the sisters on account of having 
been married had no interest or title in the ancestral properties and 
were no longer members of the HUF. The said suit was decreed on 
admission on 6th October, 1978.
14.	 He lastly stated that sons of Anup Singh filed a suit for declaration 
being Suit No. 622/1984 (hereinafter referred to as “Suit IV”) against 
Mr. Anup Singh their own father with regard to Anand Niketan house. 
He stated that this suit was also decreed on admission of defendant 
therein on 03rd January, 1985. 
15.	 Mr. Dave submitted that with these documents on record the learned 
Single Judge could not have dismissed the suit for lack of particulars 
and the Division Bench could not have dismissed the Appeal on 
the ground that the said decrees were not challenged, completely 
overlooking that the sisters, Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6, 
were young at that point of time and were under the influence of 
the powerful personality of their late father and therefore agreed to 
sign papers as directed. According to him, it is a matter of common 
knowledge that daughters in most Hindu families have little or no 
say whatsoever. He contended that, be as it may, the existence of 
HUF stood proved in the said proceedings. He emphasised that 
the decrees against the sisters were clearly sham decrees only to 
override the provisions of the Ceiling Laws as the plaint in Suit II 
clearly averred that the Collector Surplus did not accept the decree 
passed in Suit I.
16.	 Lastly, Mr. Dave, learned senior counsel, submitted that the impugned 
judgments frustrate and negate the statutory amendment brought 
about by Parliament in the Hindu Succession Act 1956, by substituting 
Section 6 with effect from 09th September, 2005. He submitted that 
the learned Single Judge and Division Bench failed to appreciate 
that the amended Section 6 had retroactive application. In support of 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
219
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
his submission, he relied upon the judgment of this Court in Vineeta 
Sharma vs. Rakesh Sharma and Ors. (2020) 9 SCC 1, wherein it 
has been held as under:- 
“54.  ... The goal of gender justice as constitutionally 
envisaged is achieved though belatedly, and the 
discrimination made is taken care of by substituting the 
provisions of Section 6 by the 2005 Amendment Act.
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
60. … Though the rights can be claimed, w.e.f. 9-9-2005, 
the provisions are of retroactive application; they confer 
benefits based on the antecedent event, and the Mitakshara 
coparcenary law shall be deemed to include a reference 
to a daughter as a coparcener….
61. ... Under the amended Section 6, since the right is given 
by birth, that is, an antecedent event, and the provisions 
operate concerning claiming rights on and from the date 
of the Amendment Act.
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
67. The proviso to Section 6(1) and Section 6(5) saves any 
partition effected before 20-12-2004. However, Explanation 
to Section 6(5) recognises partition effected by execution 
of a deed of partition duly registered under the Registration 
Act, 1908 or by a decree of a court. Other forms of partition 
have not been recognised under the definition of “partition” 
in the Explanation.
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
135. A special definition of partition has been carved out 
in the Explanation. The intendment of the provisions is not 
to jeopardise the interest of the daughter and to take care 
of sham or frivolous transaction set up in defence unjustly 
to deprive the daughter of her right as coparcener and 
prevent nullifying the benefit flowing from the provisions 
as substituted….The intendment of Section 6 of the Act is 
only to accept the genuine partitions that might have taken 
place under the prevailing law, and are not set up as a false 
defence and only oral ipse dixit is to be rejected outrightly….”
220
Supreme Court Reports
SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF OTHER SISTER, RESPONDENT 
NO.6 
17.	 Mr. Nidhesh Gupta, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of 
sister-Respondent No.6, stated that in view of the admission in Suit 
IV filed by Shri Sanjiv Singh and Shri Rajiv Singh against Anup Singh 
that ‘joint family owned ancestral/co-parcenary family properties both 
in Village Bhatgaon and Village Akbarpur Barota’, the contention of 
the Respondents that Barota land was a grant in favour of Late Major 
General Budh Singh and therefore it was his self-acquired property 
was misplaced. He submitted that once there was an admission 
by the opposite party that the property was co-parcenary, more so, 
in an earlier suit, the existence of the property being co-parcenary 
cannot be disputed in the present proceedings. 
18.	 He further stated that the Respondent Nos.1 to 5 had admitted in 
their written statement (filed in the subject suit) that the Bhatgaon 
property was ancestral property of Late Major General Budh Singh 
and that he had sold some land in Bhatgaon and with the sale 
proceeds had purchased the plot in Anand Niketan. 
19.	 He also contended that Suit II had been filed by Late Major General 
Budh Singh with clear intent to reverse the revenue entries in favour 
of the Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6. He emphasised that 
the alleged admissions with respect to Late Major General Budh Singh 
being the owner of the Barota property were made by the Appellant-
plaintiff and Respondent No.6 herein as the decree dated 07th April 
1992 (in Suit I) had not been accepted by Collector Surplus and that 
the said decree had been declared collusive. He submitted that the 
Courts below had failed to appreciate the pleading of Respondent 
Nos.1 to 5, not only in the earlier proceedings but also in the written 
statement in the present proceedings. 
20.	 In any event, he submitted that the Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent 
No.6 should have been given an opportunity to explain the alleged 
admissions in Suit II during the trial of the present case.
SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO.2
21.	 At the outset, Mr. P.S. Patwalia, learned senior counsel for the 
Respondent No.2 contended that no cause of action had arisen qua 
properties at Kalupur, Bhatgaon land and dairy plot at Sonepat, as 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
221
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
they do not exist. He pointed out that the plaint did not disclose any 
details or exact description and area cross referencing with revenue/
municipal records with respect to land at Kalupur and dairy plot at 
Sonepat.
22.	 He further stated that the Appellant-plaintiff had given up her claim 
in respect of Barota land in the written submissions filed before the 
Division Bench and the same had been recorded by the Division 
Bench in the impugned judgment as under:-
“12. It is to be noted, that based on the pleadings of the 
parties, finding no details qua two ancestral properties, 
being Kalupur land and Dairy plot, by appellant and denial 
of the same by respondents, learned Single Judge vide 
the impugned Judgment dismissed the suit of the appellant 
qua the said two properties in limine, which has not been 
challenged before this Court. Similarly, qua the Barota 
land also, appellant during the course of arguments and 
in written submissions submitted as under:—
“With regard to the plea of the land Barota being 
agricultural property and covered by the Punjab Land 
Revenue Act It is stated that since the defendant have 
propounded a will the matter has to be adjudicated 
in court the legal consequences of which will bear 
upon the said property.”
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
35. It is reiterated that the dismissal of the suit qua the 
three ancestral properties being Kalupur land, Dairy plot 
and Barota land by the learned Single Judge has not 
been challenged before this Court, and therefore there 
is no requirement for us to venture into the same. The 
suit of appellant qua the two ancestral properties being 
Kalupur land and Dairy plot, stands dismissed in limine vide 
impugned judgment of the learned Single Judge and qua 
the Barota land appellant has been rightly granted liberty 
to approach the appropriate forum at Sonepat, Haryana 
having appropriate jurisdiction, as in light of Section 16 of 
the Code, that the cause of action qua the Barota Land 
arises there.”
222
Supreme Court Reports
23.	 He emphasised that the Appellant-plaintiff had herself admitted in her 
replication that the Barota land was awarded to Late Major General 
Budh Singh as a gallantry award during the second world war. He 
submitted that it is settled law that a grant/award is the self-acquired 
or personal property of the awardee, which implies that Barota land 
was self-acquired property of Late Major General Budh Singh and 
not an HUF property. In any event, he stated that the Barota land 
which was the only property owned by Late Major General Budh 
Singh devolved upon his paternal grandsons by way of a registered 
Will dated 03rd November, 1987. 
24.	 He further stated that, admittedly, C-38, Anand Niketan house was 
purchased by Late Major General Budh Singh in 1968 and then on 
a request made by Late Major General Budh Singh, the same was 
transferred by the Government to Anup Singh, by a duly registered 
perpetual sub-lease deed, way back on 3rd April, 1970.
25.	 Learned senior counsel for the Respondent No.2 laid considerable 
emphasis on the pleadings, prayer and judgments passed in the four 
suits by the Sonepat Court, the same are reproduced hereinbelow:-
I.	
a)	
Parties to the Suit
In the Case No.671/1 of 1972 (Suit I, decreed on 06th April, 1972) 
titled Sanjiv Singh, Rajiv Singh, Saroj Salkan and Sharda Rani 
vs. Gen. Budh Singh and Anup Singh, there were four plaintiffs 
and two defendants. 
b)	
Relevant averments in the plaint
2…Gair mumkin situated in the village Barota Tehsil Sonipat 
according Jamabandi for the year 1966-67 is owned by the 
defendants and plaintiff No.1, due to ancestral property the 
same comes in equal share and on which the plaintiff and 
defendant No.1 are having possession on their share of 
the said separately as owner under the following manners 
and the parties are having no concern with the petition of 
another. The copy of the JAMABANDI is annexed.
3. That the land situated at Village Bhatgaon Tehsil 
SONIPAT was the property of the parties and the defendant 
no.2 is having possession on it. The same comes under 
the share of defendant No.2 in mutual partition and the 
defendant No.2 is an absolute owner and possession of 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
223
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
the entire land situated at Village Bhatgaon. Therefore, 
the defendant No.2 is having no concern with the land 
as mentioned in para No.1 because the plaintiff and the 
defendants are entitled to get equal share in the above 
said property as mentioned in para No.1 as a legal heirs.
4. That due to the mutual partition the plaintiffs and 
defendant No.1 are the owner and possessors as under 
and no concern of one owner to the share of another 
owner. Details of the land of plaintiff no.1 to 4 and the 
defendant No.1 is as under :-
a) The share of landlord namely Sanjeev Singh i.e. plaintiff 
No.1 is as under:- 
Khewat No.49, Khata No.67 Musttil and Killa Nos.
7
21
22
23
24
8-0
8-0
8-0
7-1
8
0/1
10
21
0-1
1
2
3
4
5
6/2
7-11
7-0
7-11 7-12 7-6 4-12
10
7
8
9
10
7-12
8-0
8-0
8-0
measuring area 114 kanals 19 marla
The share of owner Rajeev Singh Plaintiff No.2 is as under:-
Khewat No.19 Khata No.67 Mustatil and Killa Nos.
11
6
7
8
13
14
15
16
17
18/1
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
1/11
11
7
24
25
11
12
19
20
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
224
Supreme Court Reports
Measuring 113 Kanals 11 Marla
c) the share of owner Smt. Saroj Salkan plaintiff No.3 is as 
under:- Khewat No.49 Khata No.67 Mustail and Killa Nos.
1
3
23
1
2
3
0-13
5-0
7-7
8-0
3
8
9
10
11
12
13
19/2
20
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
3-12 8-0
4
5
6
15
16
24
25
6
0-12
2-14
4-8
7-06
1-8
8-0
8-0
Measuring area 113 kanals 6 marlas
d) That the share of owner Kumari Sharda Rani plaintiff 
No.3 is as under:-
Khewat No.49 Khata No.67 Mustatil and Killa Nos.
6
4
6
7
8
13
414
8-0
7-12
0-11
3-14
6
14
15
16
17
18
23
24
25
8-0
8-0
8-0
7-9
7-16
8-0
8-0
8-0
11
3
4
5
7-11
7-11
7-1
Measuring area 109 Kanals 19 marlas
E) That the share of owner Budh Singh is as under Khwa 
No.49, Khata No.67 Mustatil and Killa Nos.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
225
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
10
11
12
13
14
17/2
18
19
8-0
7-16
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
10
20
21
22
23
24
8-0
8-0
7-16
7-16
0-13
16
1
2
3/4
9
10/1
7-11
7-11
4-7
8-12
7-4
Measuring area 119 Kanals 14 Marlas situated in the 
Village Akbarpur Barota Tehsil Sonipat.
E) That the share of owner Budh Singh is as under Khwa 
No.49, Khata No.67 Mustatil and Killa Nos.
10
11
12
13
14
17/2
18
19
8-0
7-16
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
8-0
10
20
21
22
23
24
8-0
8-0
7-16
7-16
0-13
16
1
2
3/4
9
10/1
7-11
7-11
4-7
8-12
7-4
Measuring area 119 kanals 14 marlas situated in the Village 
of Akbarpur Baroa Tehsil Sonipat.
c)	
Prayer
Measuring 119 kanals 11 marla situated in the Village 
Akbarpur Barota Tehsil Sonipat is possessed as occupier 
and declare owner and on this land defendant No.2 have 
no concerned and defendant No.1 only owner agriculture 
226
Supreme Court Reports
land as written in para No.4 and the mutation of the parits 
about their lands may kindly be mutate in the revenue 
records. It is also prayed that the costs of the case may 
also be awarded in favour of the plaintiffs and against the 
defendants. Any other or further order which this Hon’ble 
Court may deem fit and proper may also be passed. It is 
prayed accordingly.
d)	
Judgment
1. The brief facts of the present suit for declaration are 
that plaintiffs 1 and 2 are sons of defendant No.2 and 
defendants 3 and 4 are daughters of defendant No.1. 
The defendant No.2 is son of defendant No.1. That land 
detailed in para 2 of the plaint was owned by defendant 
No.1 but it was ancestral in his hand. As such plaintiffs 1 
to 4 had also a share in the same. That in the year 1971 
it was partitioned between plaintiffs 1 to 4 and defendant 
No.1 in the manner as detailed in para 4 of the plaint. 
Plaintiff No.1 got the land detailed in sub para (k) plaintiff 
No.2 got the land detailed in sub para (kha) plaintiff No.3 
got the land detailed in para (ghe) plaintiff No. 4 got the 
land detailed in sub para (Ghhe). The remaining land 
remained with defendant No.1. That defendant No.2 got 
the land situated in village Bhatgaon. That parties are in 
possession of the land which came to their share since 
then as owners. That the land detailed in para 5 of the 
plaint was kept joint. As defendant started claiming titled 
the present suit for declaration was filed.
2. Defendant No.1 appeared through Sh. S.P. Jain Advocate 
Sonepat and filed a written statement. Defendant No.2 
appeared in person and also filed a written statement .... 
the suit of the plaintiffs is liable to be decreed.
3. For the above reasons I pass a decree declaring plaintiffs 
1 to 4 to be owners in possession of the land detailed 
against their name in para No. 4 of the plaint. Defendant 
has no right, title or interest in the same.
4. Parties are left to bear their own costs.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
227
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
II.	
a)	
Parties to the Suit
In the case No.66 of 1977 (Suit II, decreed on 08th March, 1977) 
titled as Major General Budh Singh vs. Saroj Salkan and Sharda 
Hooda, there was one plaintiff and two defendants.
b)	
Relevant averments in the plaint
1. That the plaintiff (Late Gen. Budh Singh) was owner of 
land measuring 113 kanals 6 marlas comprised in Khewat 
No.49, Khata No.67 rectangle and kila No.1/23…. and land 
measuring 110 kanals 9 marlas comprising in Khewat No.49 
Khata No.67 rectangle and kila no… situated in the area 
of village Akbarpur Barota, Tehsil and district Sonepat vide 
jamabandi for the year 1966-67 alongwith other land as 
detailed in the said jamabandi of the jamabandi 1966-67 
is attached herewith.
2. That the defendant in the year 1972 on 24.3.72 alongwith 
the sons of Anup Singh Sanjeev Singh and Rajeev Singh 
filed a declaratory suit against the plaintiff in the court of 
Sub Judge, Sonepat and the above said land detailed 
in para No.1 if the land was declared the ownership of 
the defendants whereas the said land was owned and 
possessed by the plaintiff at that time and now also the 
said land detailed in para No.1 of the plaint continuous to 
be owned and possessed by the plaintiff because the said 
decree of the Sub Judge Sonepat dated 7.4.72 was not 
accepted by the Collector surplus and the land detailed in 
para No.1 was assessed and calculated in the area of the 
plaintiff. The said decree was declared collusive between 
the parties and under the eyes of law as provided under 
sections 8 and 12 of the Haryana Land Ceiling Act the 
above said transfer under the decree does not effect the 
rights of the original owner i.e the plaintiff and the plaintiff 
continues to be owner in possession of the said land.
c)	
Prayer
That the plaintiff prays for a decree for declaration to the 
effect that the land detailed in para No.1 of the plaint 
continues to be owned and possessed by the plaintiff 
228
Supreme Court Reports
and the revenue entries in the name of the defendants 
are wrong and ineffective as the decree of the civil court 
dated 4.3.72 has been declared a nullity by the civil court 
and the defendants have no right, title with the same be 
passed in favour of the plaintiff against the defendants with 
costs. Any other relief deemed proper be also awarded.
d)	
Decree/Judgment
1. The plaintiff has filed this suit for declaration to the 
effect that the plaintiffs are owners in possession of the 
suit land and that the defendants have no concern or 
titled thereto-.
2. The defendants appeared through counsel and filed 
written statement admitting the claim of the plaintiffs. 
Statements of parties/counsel have been recorded.
3. Since the parties are not on issue on any of the points, 
the suit is decreed as prayed for leaving parties to bear 
their own costs.
4. Decree-sheet be drawn accordingly.
III.	
a)	
Parties to the Suit
Thereafter, Suit III being Suit No.219/1977 was filed by Anup Singh 
against his own father Late Major General Budh Singh praying for a 
declaration that Anup Singh was the owner as well as in possession 
of the Barota land covered by Suits I and II. 
b)	
Relevant averments in the plaint
1. That agricultural land measuring 119 kanals 14 marlas, 
and 56 kanals 16 marlas totaling 16 kanals 12 marlas, 
comprising in Khewat No. 52, Khatauni No.64, rectangles 
and killa No…..situated in the area of village Akbarpur, 
Barota Tehsil and distt. Sonepat vide jamabandi for the 
year 1971-72 along with other land in the same village 
and other villages such as Bhatgaon, as ancestral land 
of the parties and as shown in the name of the defendant 
No.1 in the previous Revenue Records. The copies of the 
jamabandi are attached herewith
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
229
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
2. That the above said land, detailed in para No.1 of 
the plaint along with other lands were wrongly entered 
in the names of Shrimati Saroj Salkan and Smt. Sharda 
daughters of the defendant, as owners in the Revenue 
Records in the year 1971-72 but the defendant after filing 
a suit in the Civil Court get the revenue records corrected 
and the above said lands as detailed in para No.1 of the 
plaint were again reverted in the name of the defendant 
and mutations No.2335 and 2336 were duly entered and 
sanctioned in the name of the defendant as owners and 
since the defendant is shown as owner of the above 
land as detailed in para No.1 of the plaint. Copies of the 
mutations are attached herewith.
3. That the plaintiff and the defendant constitute a Joint 
Hindu Family being father son and the said daughters 
Smt. Saroj Salkan and Smt. Sharda who have since been 
married, have no more remained members of the Joint 
Family and of the ancestral property in question, including 
land detailed in para No.1 of the plaint, being ancestral 
property constitutional Hindu Joint family pariets to the said 
property being coparceners of the Hindu Joint Family are 
sons of the Hindu Joint Family in equal shares.
4. That the defendants disrupted the Hindu Joint family in 
the month of December, 1977 and divided all the Hindu 
Joint Family property in his hand of which the defendant 
was holding as Karta of the Joint Hindu Family at his own 
instance and the land detailed in para No.1 of the plaint 
was given to the plaintiff in the said family partition by 
the defendant.
5. That since December, 1977 when the land detailed in 
para No.1 of the plaint was given to the plaintiff in partition, 
the plaintiff is owner in possession of the same and the 
defendant has no right or title over the said land.
c)	
Prayer
That the plaintiff prays for decree for declaration to the 
effect that the land detailed in para No.1 of the plaint is 
owned and possessed by the plaintiff and the defendants 
230
Supreme Court Reports
has no right or title over the same, be passed in favour of 
the plaintiff against the defendant with costs.
d)	
Judgment
In view of the admitted written statement as also admitted 
statement dated 29.9.78, the suit of the Plaintiff is liable 
to be decreed and is hereby decreed to the effect that 
the Plaintiff is the owner in possession of this suit land 
described in the heading of the Plaint. However, parties 
hereto have to bear their own costs. Decree Sheet is 
drawn accordingly.
IV.	
a)	
Parties to the Suit
Suit IV being Suit No.622/1984 was between Anup Singh and his 
sons, where they constituted Joint Hindu Family and pertained to 
the Anand Niketan house. The said house was partitioned between 
them by virtue of the decree passed in the Suit.
b)	
Relevant averments in the plaint
1. That the parties to the suit are governed by Hindu 
Law and they constitute a Joint Hindu Family, defendant 
as Karta of the Hindu Joint family and joint family owned 
ancestral / coparcenary family properties both in Village 
Bhatgaon and Village Akbarpur Barota and in the said Hindu 
Joint Family properties, the plaintiffs had birth right being 
co- parcener of the Hindu Joint family and therefore, the 
owner of 1/3rd each in the said properties and defendant 
was owner of 1/3rd share.
2. That the defendant about 10 years back sold away 
the coparcenary property i.e agricultural land measuring 
about 30 acres situated at Village Bhatgaon and joint 
family house, which formed the nucleus of the Joint Hindu 
family, by act of good management and out of the said 
sale consideration, the defendant purchased the plot No. 
C-38, situated at Anand Niketan, New Delhi and thereafter 
constructed a house thereon which is known as Khoti No. 
C-38, situated at Anand Niketan, New Delhi, shown in the 
site plan attached and bounded as under:-
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
231
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
North: Service Lane 15’ wide
South: Road 45’ wide
East: Plot No. C-37
West: Plot No. C-39
3. That besides the above said house as detailed in para 
No.3, of the plaint, the said Hindu Joint family also, owns 
land in the name of the defendant, measuring 2 kanals 
19 marlas, comprising Khewat No. 167, Khata No. 179, 
situated in the area of Village Lehlara, Teh. and Dist. 
Sonepat, vide Jamabandi for the year 1977-78, which 
was also purchased from Joint Family funds in the name 
of the defendant and in which also the plaintiffs and the 
defendant are owners in possession of 1/3rd share each. 
The copy of Jamabandi is attached.
c)	
Prayer
That the plaintiffs, most respectfully prayed that the decree 
for declaration to the effect that the plaintiffs are owners 
in possession of 2/3rd share of the properties i.e house 
C-38, Anand Niketan, New Delhi and shown in the site 
plan attached and land as detailed in paras No. 3 & 4 of 
the plaint and the defendant is only owner in possession of 
2/3rd share in the same, be passed in favour of the plaintiffs 
and against the defendant, with costs. Any other relief 
which the Ld. Court deems fit and proper be also passed.
d)	
Judgment
1. The present suit has been instituted by the plaintiffs 
for declaration to the effect that the plaintiffs are owners 
in possession of 2/3rd share of the properties i.e. House 
C-38, situated in Anand Niketan, New Delhi and shown 
in the site plan attached and detailed in para no.3 and 4 
of the plaint.
2.The suit is being not contested by the defendant. He 
has filed his written statement admitting the suit of the 
plaintiffs and has also got recorded his statement on oath 
to the same effect.
232
Supreme Court Reports
3. Accordingly, the suit of the plaintiffs succeeds and a 
decree for declaration to the effect that the plaintiffs are 
owners in possession of 2/3rd share of the house situated 
in Anand Niketan New Delhi and shown in the site plan and 
detailed in para no.3 and 4 of the plaint, and the defendant 
is owner in possession of the remaining 1/3rd share in that 
house, is passed in favour of the plaintiffs and against the 
defendant, with no orders as to the costs, decree sheet 
be prepared accordingly and the file be consigned to the 
record room with due compliance.
26.	 Learned senior counsel for Respondent No.2 submitted that effect 
of the four decrees was that the Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent 
No.6 stood ousted from all the properties of Late Major General 
Budh Singh.
27.	 He contended that the Appellant-plaintiff was required to furnish details 
as to how and when the self-acquired property was thrown into the 
fold of the co-parcenary property by Late Major General Budh Singh. 
He stated that the plaint lacked averments regarding exact details 
of specific date/month/year of creation of HUF for the first time by 
throwing property into common hotchpotch. He contended that a mere 
averment in the plaint that a Joint Hindu Family or HUF exists, was 
not enough, as detailed facts were required to be categorically stated 
as to when and how the properties had become HUF properties. Such 
averment had to be made by factual references qua each property 
claimed to be an HUF property. He emphasised that the plaint was 
silent about facts as to when (i.e. the exact date, month and year and 
whether before or after coming into force of the Hindu Succession 
Act, 1956) and how the personal property of Late Major General 
Budh Singh was thrown into the common hotchpotch to form an HUF.
28.	 He submitted that it is well settled law that when pleadings do not 
give sufficient details, the Court is not required to frame issues and 
can dismiss the claim or pass a decree on admission. In support of 
his submission, he relied upon the judgment passed by this Court 
in Maria Margarida Sequeira Fernandes & Ors v. Erasmo Jack 
De Sequeira (D) Tr. Lrs. & Ors. 2012 (5) SCC 370, wherein it has 
been held as under:- 
“74. If the pleadings do not give sufficient details, they will 
not raise an issue, and the Court can reject the claim or 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
233
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
pass a decree on admission. On vague pleadings no issue 
arises. Only when he so establishes, does the question of 
framing of an issue arise. Framing of issue is an extremely 
important stage in a civil trial. Judges are expected to 
carefully examine the pleadings and documents before 
framing of issues in a given case.”
29.	 He lastly stated that the Appellant-plaintiff by way of the instant suit 
had indulged in luxurious litigation. He pointed out that such act of 
the Appellant-plaintiff had been condemned by the Division Bench 
in the impugned judgement, wherein it was observed as under:-
“47. We condemn the act of appellant, who in a very 
half-hearted, almost callous manner, chose to initiate this 
luxurious litigation wasting the precious time of the legal 
machinery by setting it into motion without any cause or 
purpose. The suit contains half-baked facts which are not 
permissible in law. Nothing stopped appellant from filing 
requisite proof to establish her case qua the Barota land; 
to challenge the previous judgment dated 08.03.1977 
passed in Suit II; to challenge the title deeds in favor of 
late Mr. Anup Singh qua Anand Niketan property; take 
appropriate steps qua Bhatgaon land. The initiation 
thereof by appellant is a gross abuse of the process of 
law. Clever drafting and illusory basis cannot make the 
suit maintainable if it does not have any material basis. 
Learned Single Judge has rightly exercised his powers 
under Order XII rule 6 of the Code by nipping it in the 
bud, thereby closing the chapter of disputes qua the five 
ancestral properties involved.”
SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO.3
30.	 Mr. Narendra Prabhakar, learned counsel for Respondent No.3 stated 
that the present suit filed by Appellant-plaintiff was founded on two 
erroneous assumptions, namely, that there was a presumption of Joint 
Hindu Family property despite no specific averment in the plaint that 
a Joint Hindu Family had been constituted post 1957 and that all the 
decrees passed by the Courts below were false and inconsequential.
31.	 He submitted that in law there is a presumption that every Hindu 
Family which is joint in food and worship is a Joint Family; but there 
234
Supreme Court Reports
is no presumption that the estate is joint or that the properties of the 
family members belong to the Hindu Joint Family.
32.	 He stated that Sanjiv Singh (son of Anup Singh) sold a part of Barota 
land to Respondent No.6 vide sale deed dated 23rd January 1992 
and subsequently, the said property was sold by Respondent No.6 
to one Kuldeep Khatri vide sale deed dated 12th January 2000. He 
submitted that the aforesaid documents, by way of deemed fiction 
incorporated in Order XII CPC stood admitted by Respondent No.6. 
REJOINDER ARGUMENTS
33.	 In rejoinder, Mr. Dushyant Dave and Mr. Nidhesh Gupta, learned 
senior counsel for the Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6 fairly 
stated that their clients were confining their relief to Barota and 
Anand Niketan properties. They candidly stated that they were not 
pressing any relief qua lands at Kalupur, Sonepat, Bhatgaon and 
Dairy Plot at Sonepat. 
34.	 They submitted that even if the rights with regard to Barota and 
Anand Niketan properties had reverted back to Late Major General 
Budh Singh they continued to remain co-parcenary properties in 
which the Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6 continued to 
have a share. They stated that this position had been admitted by 
Mr. Anup Singh in paragraph 3 of the plaint filed in Suit III (which 
has been reproduced hereinabove). 
35.	 They further submitted that decrees passed in the four suits were 
not partition decrees as the said decrees had been passed in 
declaratory suits. 
REASONING
ORDER XII RULE 6 CPC AUTHORISES THE COURT TO DISMISS 
THE SUIT ALSO
36.	 Having heard learned senior counsel and learned counsel for the 
parties, this Court is of the view that the submission that the learned 
Single Judge could have dismissed the suit under Order VII Rule 11 
CPC alone and not under Order XII Rule 6 CPC and that too without 
any application being filed by the Respondents, is untenable in law. 
37.	 Recently, a coordinate Bench of this Court in Rajiv Ghosh vs. Satya 
Naryan Jaiswal, Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.9975 of 2025 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
235
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
dated 07th April, 2025 has upheld the view of the Division Bench of 
the Delhi High Court in ITDC Limited vs. Chander Pal Sood and 
Son, (2000) 84 DLT 337 (DB) that Order XII Rule 6 CPC gives a very 
wide discretion to the Court to pass a judgment at any stage of the 
suit and that too on its own motion i.e. without any application being 
filed by any party. In the said judgment, it was also held that Order XII 
Rule 6 CPC, authorises the Court to not only pass a decree regarding 
admitted claim, but also to dismiss the suit. The relevant portion of 
the judgment in Rajiv Ghosh (supra) is reproduced hereinbelow:-
“36. A Division Bench of the Delhi High Court very correctly 
laid down the following interpretation of the provision 
of O. 12, R. 6, CPC, in the decision of ITDC Limited v. 
Chander Pal Sood and Son, reported in (2000) 84 DLT 
337 (DB): (2000 AIHC 1990) : 
“Order 12, R. 6 of Code gives a very wide discretion 
to the Court. Under this rule the Court may at any 
stage of the suit either on the application of any party 
or of its own motion and without determination of any 
other question between the parties can make such 
order giving such judgment as it may think fit on the 
basis of admission of a fact made in the pleadings 
or otherwise whether orally or in writing.”
xxx
xxx
xxx
39. This rule authorizes the court to enter a judgment 
where a claim is admitted and to pass a decree on such 
admitted claim. This can be done at any stage. [See: Uttam 
Singh (supra)]. Thus, a plaintiff may move for judgment 
upon admission by the defendant in his written statement 
at any stage of the suit although he has joined issue on 
the defence.” [See: Brown v. Pearson, (1882) 21 Ch D 
716]. Likewise, a defendant may apply for dismissal of the 
suit on the basis of admission by the plaintiff in rejoinder.”
EFFECT OF FOUR DECREES. APPELLANT-PLAINTIFF CANNOT 
GO BEHIND THEM
38.	 This Court is of the opinion that it is important to appreciate the 
effect of four suits filed by different parties to this litigation between 
1971 and 1984.
236
Supreme Court Reports
39.	 Suit I for declaration (being Suit No.671/1) was filed by the present 
Appellant-plaintiff along with her sister Respondent No.6 and minor 
sons of their brother Anup Singh on 25th March, 1972 against Late 
Major General Budh Singh and Anup Singh with respect to Barota 
and Bhatgaon lands. There was no pleading in the said suit that any 
HUF was created post 1957. On the contrary, in the said plaint, it was 
averred by the Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6 themselves 
that upon a mutual partition in 1971, the land situated at Barota was 
partitioned between the parties as detailed in paragraph 4 (four) of 
the plaint and the land situated at Village Bhatgaon, Tehsil Sonepat 
fell in the share of Anup Singh and that he was the absolute owner 
and in possession of the entire land situated at Village Bhatgaon. 
40.	 Though Suit I was decreed by mutual consent in accordance with 
paragraph 4 (four) of the plaint, yet Late Major General Budh Singh 
filed Suit II (being Suit No.66/1977) against his two daughters 
alone i.e. Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6 herein without 
impleading either his son (Anup Singh) or his paternal grandsons, 
who were parties to Suit I praying for a declaration that Late Major 
General Budh Singh continues to be the owner of the land situated 
at Village Barota and his daughters have no right or title in the said 
land as the decree of the civil court dated 4th March, 1972 had been 
declared a nullity by the Collector Surplus. It is pertinent to mention 
that in Suit II, Late Major General Budh Singh did not pray before the 
Court for a declaration of nullity of the decree dated 4th March, 1972 
passed in Suit I. Late Major General Budh Singh in Suit II also did 
not seek recall of the decree dated 4th March, 1972 to the extent it 
granted relief to his paternal grandsons or to his son (Anup Singh). 
Consequently, the Court in Sonepat had no occasion and did not 
declare the decree in Suit I to be a nullity, in its entirety.
41.	 Therefore, on a co-joint reading of the pleadings, prayers and 
judgments/decrees in Suits I and II to which the Appellant-plaintiff 
and Respondent No.6 were parties along with their father (Late Major 
General Budh Singh), this Court is of the view that Appellant-plaintiff 
and Respondent No.6 had accepted their father as the absolute 
owner of Barota land. The effect of the decree in Suit II is that 
ownership of the entire Barota land stood reverted to Late Major 
General Budh Singh and the Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6 
stood ousted from the HUF of Late Major General Budh Singh. The 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
237
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
revenue entries in the name of Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent 
No.6, to their knowledge, stood declared as wrong and ineffective. 
As the said decrees and findings were within the knowledge of the 
Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6, they are bound by the same. 
Consequently, this Court is in agreement with the view of the Division 
Bench in the present case that, “the issue of ownership in favour of 
late General has already been settled way back on 08.03.1977, which 
has neither been challenged nor set aside or modified or appealed 
by anyone much less the appellant before us. Thus, a decree by a 
Court of law is for all purposes final and binding upon all parties, 
including the appellant, involved therein. Such a decree, if not set 
aside is for perpetuity…”.
42.	 Thereafter, Suit III (being Suit No.219/1977) was filed by Anup Singh 
against his own father Late Major General Budh Singh praying for a 
declaration that Anup Singh was the owner as well as in possession 
of the Barota land covered by decrees passed in Suits I and II, except 
that part of the Barota land that fell in the share of Respondent No.6 
by virtue of the decree passed in Suit I. Even this portion of Barota 
land which was owned by Late Major General Budh Singh (in view 
of the decree passed in Suit II) was willed by him in favour of his 
paternal grandsons (i.e. sons of Anup Singh). As Suit III was decreed 
by consent, Barota land is governed by the same.
43.	 Since the decrees passed in Suits II and III were never challenged 
by the Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6 before any competent 
Court, despite they are having knowledge of the same, they cannot 
go behind the said decrees in the present proceedings and argue 
on the basis that they are a nullity and do not bind them. In this 
regard, the learned Single Judge has correctly observed, “averring 
in a suit of the year 2007 that decree passed way back on 8.3.1977 
i.e. 30 years back is to be treated as collusive and hence not binding 
cannot help the plaintiff because as per the decree, the father did 
act as the owner of the Barota land”.
RESPONDENT NO.6 CAN’T CONTEND THAT BAROTA IS OWNED 
BY HUF/ COPARCENARY
44.	 Moreover, as Respondent No.6 had on her own volition purchased 
part of Barota land from Sanjiv Singh (son of Anup Singh) vide 
sale deed dated 23rd January 1992 and subsequently sold the said 
238
Supreme Court Reports
property to a third party vide sale deed dated 12th January 2000, 
this Court is of the view that Respondent No.6 is estopped from 
contending that Barota property is owned by a co-parcenary/HUF 
of which she is a member.
AMENDED SECTION 6 OF HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956 IS 
NOT APPLICABLE
45.	 This Court is also of the view that while the decrees in Suits II, III and 
IV were declaratory decrees, yet they were grounded on the consensus 
(between the parties) that the properties stood partitioned amongst 
the family members. This Court says so, not only, on the basis of 
admission by Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6 in the plaint 
filed in Suit I, but also because without a partition inter se between 
the parties, the declaratory decrees could not have been passed. It is 
settled law that partition need not be effected in any particular/standard 
format. Accordingly, this Court is of the view that the decrees passed 
in Suits II, III and IV amount to a recognition and acceptance of the 
fact of partition between the parties prior to 20th December 2004. 
Consequently, the proviso to sub-Section 1 of amended Section 6 
of Hindu Succession Act, 1956 is attracted to the present case and 
arguments advanced by Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6 with 
respect to Section 6 are not applicable to the present case. 
C-38, ANAND NIKETAN HOUSE
46.	 As far as C-38, Anand Niketan house is concerned, it was admittedly 
purchased by Late Major General Budh Singh in the year 1968 
and thereafter on a request made by him, the said house was 
transferred by the cooperative society to Anup Singh by a duly 
registered perpetual sub-Lease Deed dated 03rd April, 1970. Despite, 
the registered sub-Lease Deed in the name of Anup Singh, being 
within the knowledge of the Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6, 
it was never challenged for thirty-seven long years prior to the filing 
of the present suit. Consequently, the suit to the extent it challenges 
ownership of C-38, Anand Niketan house is barred by limitation.
47.	 In fact, in the plaint filed in Case No.671/1 being Suit I, it was admitted 
by the Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6 that upon mutual 
partition in 1971, the land situated in village Bhatgaon, Tehsil Sonepat 
fell in the share of Anup Singh and that he was the absolute owner 
and in possession of the said land. Consequently, the subsequent 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
239
Saroj Salkan v. Huma Singh & Ors.
sale of the Bhatgaon property or use of its sale proceeds to purchase 
the Anand Niketan plot and construct a house thereon would not 
give any cause of action to the Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent 
No.6 to file a fresh suit for partition. 
48.	 Further, the averments qua co-parcenary/Joint Hindu Family owned 
ancestral property in Suit IV was only in the context of HUF of Anup 
Singh and his two sons to the exclusion of Appellant-plaintiff and 
Respondent No. 6. In Mayne’s Hindu Law, 11th Edition, p. 347, it has 
been held that members of a branch, or of a sub-branch, can form a 
distinct and separate corporate unit within the larger corporate family 
and hold property as such. Such property will be joint family property 
of the members of the branch inter se, but will be separate property 
of that branch in relation to the larger family (See: Kalyani (Dead) by 
LRs. vs. Narayanan, 1980 Supp SCC 298). Consequently, this Court 
is of the opinion that the averments of co-parcenary/Joint Hindu Family/
ancestral property in Suit IV deal with the co-parcenary/HUF of Anup 
Singh to the exclusion of Appellant-plaintiff and Respondent No.6 and 
give no right or cause of action to the latter to file a suit for partition.
49.	 Also, Suit IV was premised on the basis that Appellant-plaintiff and 
Respondent No.6 have no right in the properties of their father- Late 
Major General Budh Singh as partition of HUF of Late Major General 
Budh Singh and HUF of Anup Singh had already taken place. It was 
in pursuance to the said pleadings that a decree of partition of Anand 
Niketan house was passed and the said house in its entirety was 
partitioned between Anup Singh and his two sons.
CONCLUSION
50.	 Keeping in view the aforesaid findings, this Court is of the view that 
the present appeal is devoid of any merit. Accordingly, the present 
appeal is dismissed. 
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain