[2025] 7 S.C.R. 380 : 2025 INSC 808
Greater Mohali Area Development Authority (GMADA) 
Through Its Estate Officer (H) 
v. 
Anupam Garg Etc.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 7392-93 of 2025)
04 June 2025
[Sanjay Karol* and Prasanna B. Varale, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to correctness of the order passed by the National 
Commission imposing liability on the Development Authority to 
pay for interest paid by the respondents-buyers for loans secured 
for the flat, on account of delay in delivery of possession of flats.
Headnotes†
Consumer Protection Act, 1985 – Compensation – Liability 
of the Development Authority to pay interest on the loan 
taken by the buyers for delay in delivery of flats/plots – On 
facts, consumer complaint by the buyer for refund of money 
paid on account of delay in delivery of flat – Direction by the 
State Commission to the Development Authority to refund the 
entire amount deposited by the buyers in respect of securing 
flats along with 8% interest and additional costs for mental 
harassment, litigation and the interest paid by buyers to the 
Bank for the loans secured to arrange for the funds to be 
invested in the project – Appeal thereagainst dismissed – 
Interference with, as regards the award of interest on the loan 
taken by buyers to be paid to the Development Authority:
Held: Commission was to compute an amount as compensation, 
in which one of the factors would be that in order to secure a 
property in the scheme floated by the Development Authority, the 
buyers had taken out a loan and would be liable to pay interest 
thereon – However, this order does not permit the interest on the 
loan, in its entirety, to be saddled by the authority responsible for 
the housing scheme and the delay – Orders of the Commissions 
does not reveal any exceptional or strong reasons for the interest 
on the loan taken by the buyers to be paid by the Development 
Authority – Whether the buyers of the flat do so by utilizing their 
* Author
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
381
Greater Mohali Area Development Authority (GMADA) Through Its 
Estate Officer (H) v. Anupam Garg Etc.
savings, taking a loan for such purpose or securing the required 
finances by any other permissible means, is not a consideration 
that the developer of the project is required to keep in mind – The 
one who is buying a flat is a consumer, and the one who is building 
it is a service provider – That is the only relationship between the 
parties – If there is a deficiency or delay in service, the consumer 
is entitled to be compensated for the same – Repayment of 
the entire principal amount along with 8% interest thereon, as 
stipulated in the contract, alongside the clarification that there 
would be no other liability on the authority, sufficiently meets this 
requirement – Amount of interest awarded is the compensation to 
the investment maker for the amount of money and the time he has 
been denied the fruits of that investment – 8% interest awarded 
on the entire amount that is being invested, is the compensation 
for being deprived of the investment of money – Apart from this 
no amount of interest on the loan taken by the buyers could have 
been awarded. [Paras 13, 15, 17, 18]
Case Law Cited
National Seeds Corporation Ltd. v. M. Madhusudan Reddy [2012] 2 
SCR 1065 : (2012) 2 SCC 505; Greater Mohali Area Development 
Authority v. Priyanka Naiyyar, 1st appeal No. 1456 of 2016; 
Bangalore Development Authority v. Syndicate Bank [2007] 7 SCR 
47 : (2007) 6 SCC 711; GDA v. Balbir Singh [2004] 3 SCR 68 : 
(2004) 5 SCC 65; DLF Homes Panchkula (P) Ltd. v. D.S. Dhanda 
[2019] 7 SCR 1061: (2020) 16 SCC 318 – referred to.
List of Keywords
Compensation; Consumer; Scheme of Residential flats; Greater 
Mohali Area Development Authority; Interest paid on loans for 
investing in project; Delay in delivery of possession of flats; 
Additional costs for mental harassment and litigation; Service 
provider; Deficiency or delay in service.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 7392-7393 
of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 01.04.2019 of the National 
Consumers Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi in FA 
Nos. 1852 and 1853 of 2018
382
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Ms. Vagisha Kochar, Ms. Nancy Shah, Prashant Manchanda.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Gagan Gupta, Sr. Adv., Ananta Prasad Mishra, Saurabh Gupta, 
Jasbir Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol J.
Leave Granted.
2.	
Under challenge in these appeals is a judgment and final order dated 
1st April, 2019 passed in First Appeal Nos. 1852 of 2018 and 1853 
of 2018 by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, 
New Delhi1, at the instance of Greater Mohali Area Development 
Authority2, who is aggrieved by the order dated 1st March, 2018 
of the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Punjab, 
Chandigarh3, whereby the State Commission partly allowed the 
respondents’ complaints (being CC No.438 of 2017 filed by respondent 
Anupam Garg; and CC No.439 of 2017 filed by respondent Rajiv 
Kumar) against GMADA directing the latter to refund the entire 
amount deposited by both parties in respect of securing flats in the 
residential scheme launched by it along with 8% interest thereon as 
also paying additional costs for mental harassment, litigation and the 
interest paid by the respondents to the State Bank of India, for the 
loans that they had secured to arrange for the funds required to be 
invested in the project.
3.	
For the sake of convenience we only illustrate the facts of CC No.438 
of 2017 filed by Anupam Garg, which are similar to the facts being 
in CC No.439 of 2017 filed by Rajiv Kumar. The sequence of events 
and background (as per CC 438 of 2017), as have been culled out 
by the Commissions, leading up to these appeals are:
1	
NCDRC
2	
GMADA
3	
State Commission 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
383
Greater Mohali Area Development Authority (GMADA) Through Its 
Estate Officer (H) v. Anupam Garg Etc.
3.1	 GMADA launched a scheme of residential flats termed ‘Purab 
Premium Apartments’ to be constructed in the Sector 88 locality, 
at Mohali in the year 2011. Anupam Garg secured an application 
form for a 2-BHK + Servant Room Residential Apartment-Type 
II upon payment of 10% of the total consideration of ₹ 55 lakhs, 
i.e., ₹ 5,50,000/- as earnest money.
3.2	 The allotment of the flats took place through a ‘draw of lots’ 
on 19th March, 2012. He was successful and a Letter of Intent4 
was issued in his favour on 21st May, 2012. It provided details 
regarding price, payment schedule, possible plans of payment, 
locations where payment can be deposited, particulars of 
ownership, possession, management and maintenance and 
other general terms and conditions. The relevant extracts of 
the LOI are as follows:
“PAYMENT SCHEDULE
2.1	 For Initial 30%
(i) Payment of Rs.1100000 (Eleven Lakhs Only) 
being 20 % price of the apartment is to be made by 
22.6.2012 to complete 30% of the apartment. 
(ii) In case of failure to make the payment within 
stipulated period, the amount paid shall be refunded 
with 10% deduction and allotment cancelled. 
However, this period can be further extended up to 
30 days with 2% Penalty, up to 60 days with 3 % 
penalty and up to 90 days with 5 % penalty on prior 
written request. 
2.2	 For Balance Payment of 65%
Plan-A
A sum of Rs.33,96,250/- (Thirty three lakhs ninety 
six thousand two hundred fifty only) being balance 
65% of tentative price of apartment within 60 days of 
the issue of LOI with a rebate of 5% on the balance 
amount payable. 
4	
LOI
384
Supreme Court Reports
Plan-B
A sum of Rs. 35,75,000 (Thirty five lakhs seventy five 
thousand only) being balance 65% of the tentative 
price can be paid with 12% interest in 6 half yearly 
instalments from the date of issue of LOI, Payment 
schedule mentioned as under:-
2.3	 For Balance Payment of 5%
(i) The balance amount of Rs.275000/- (Two lakhs 
seventy five thousand Only) being 5% of the tentative 
price of apartment shall be payable at the time of 
possession. 
(ii) Delays in payment of instalments shall result in 
cancellation of the allotment. However, on request 
establishing genuine grounds, delays up to 12 
months can be condoned by the Estate Officer, by 
charging 18% interest for the period of delay. Delays 
beyond 12 months shall not be condoned under 
any circumstances and shall result in cancellation 
of allotment and refund of the amounts paid, after 
forfeiture of 10% of the amount. Possession shall not 
be handed over till all dues are cleared. 
(iii) In case of fully paid apartments, the enhancement 
in price (due to the reasons laid down in para 1(ii), 
shall have to be paid within 90 days of such demand 
without payment of any interest or in 6 Half Yearly 
instalments along with interest @ 12 per annum. 
In other cases the enhancement shall be built into 
balance instalments.
(iv) All payments shall be made by a bank draft drawn 
in favour of Estate Officer GMADA…
OWNERSHIP AND POSSESSION
(I)	
Allotments shall be on free hold basis.
(II)	 Possession of apartment shall be handed over 
after completion of development works at site in 
a period of 36 months from the date of issuance 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
385
Greater Mohali Area Development Authority (GMADA) Through Its 
Estate Officer (H) v. Anupam Garg Etc.
of Letter of Intent. In case for any reason, the 
Authority is unable to deliver the possession 
of apartments within stipulated period, allottee 
shall have the right to withdraw from the scheme 
by moving an application to the Estate Officer, 
in which case, the Authority shall refund the 
entire amount deposited by the applicant along 
with 8 % interest compounded annually. Apart 
from this, there shall be no other liability of the 
Authority.
(III)	 The ownership and possession of apartments 
shall continue to vest with Greater Mohali Area 
Development Authority until full payment is made 
of outstanding dues in respect of said apartment. 
(IV)	 The allottee shall be required to execute a 
Deed of Conveyance in prescribed format 
and manner within 90 days of payment of 
entire money. The expenses of registration 
and execution of Conveyance Deed shall be 
borne by the allottee. 
(V)	 There shall be bar on sale of the apartment till 
2 years after handing over of possession or 5 
years from date of issuance of LOI whichever 
is earlier.
(VI)	 The floor of the apartment shall be allocated 
through draw of lots.” 
3.3	 The scheduled date of delivery of possession was 21st May, 
2015. It has been alleged that on his visit to the development 
site in May, 2015, the respondent found no development 
commensurate to the time that had passed. Since it did not 
appear likely that possession of the flat would be delivered to 
the respective owners for another 2-3 years, he resolved to 
opt out of the scheme.
3.4	 He approached the concerned official in this regard, who 
apparently informed him that if he chooses to pursue this route, 
GMADA would pay him the deposited amount, along with 8% 
interest thereon, from 21st May, 2015, till the date of payment.
386
Supreme Court Reports
3.5	 Given that no relevant document stipulated such a condition, 
the respondents filed a consumer complaint (CC No.197 of 
2016), which was withdrawn due to certain technical reasons. 
Shortly after, GMADA issued a letter of allotment-cum-offer of 
possession dated 29th June, 2016, stating that the ‘numbering 
draw’ was held on 5th January, 2016 and he had been allotted 
‘Apartment No.902, Tower No.7, Block C, Floor 8, Type 2’.
3.6	 Upon visiting the allotted flat, of which he has allegedly been 
in possession as of now, he found that various changes were 
made to the project itself, as also in the facilities and amenities 
provided therein, unilaterally. 
4.	
It is in the aforesaid backdrop that the complaint, the subject matter 
of these appeals, came to be filed.
5.	
The State Commission’s findings can be summarized inter alia as 
under :
a)	
There is no substance to the allegation that the facilities to be 
provided by GMADA have not been provided. There are no 
photographs to substantiate this, nor is there any report issued 
by a competent person to prove the absence of these facilities 
in the project.
b)	
The presence of an arbitration clause would not bar the 
jurisdiction of the State Commission, in view of the findings 
of this Court in National Seeds Corporation Ltd. v. M. 
Madhusudan Reddy5.
c)	
GMADA cannot stop the respondents from seeking a refund of 
their money because it was concluded that there is no proof 
on record that the authority completed the project within the 
stipulated time. Such desire to seek a refund is also not without 
precedent as GMADA had already extended this facility to 
another allottee.
d)	
It is an undisputed position that the respondents had paid a 
substantial amount of consideration towards the flats they were 
to receive and only a small portion of the total consideration 
remained to be paid.
5	
(2012) 2 SCC 505
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
387
Greater Mohali Area Development Authority (GMADA) Through Its 
Estate Officer (H) v. Anupam Garg Etc.
e)	
The respondents were entitled to withdraw from the scheme. 
GMADA cannot be accorded any benefit on the ground that 
they had offered possession to the respondents on 29th June, 
2016, which is more than a year after the stipulated date of 
completion.
6.	
Having come to the conclusions as above, the State Commission 
passed the following order:
“17. In view of the above discuss, the Consumer 
Complaint No.438 of 2017 is accepted and the opposite 
party is directed to refund the entire deposited amount of 
Rs.50,46,250/- to the complainant along with interest at 
the rate of 8%, compounded annually under Clause 3(II) 
of the Letter of Intent, Ex. C-2. The opposite party shall 
also pay a compensation of Rs.60,000/- to the complainant 
for mental tension and harassment suffered by him and 
Rs.30,000/-, as costs of litigation. The opposite party shall 
also pay the interest paid by the complainant to State Bank 
of India on the loan taken from it and paid to the opposite 
party for the purchase of the flat, as charged by the Bank 
from the complainant. 
18. In view of reasons and discussion held in Consumer 
Complaint No.438 of 2017, the Consumer Complaint 
No.439 of 2017 accepted and the opposite party is directed 
to refund the entire deposited amount of Rs.41,29,619/- 
to the complainant, along with interest at the rate of 8%, 
compounded annually under Clause 3(II) of the Letter 
of Intent, Ex. C-2. The opposite party shall also pay a 
compensation of Rs.60,000/- to the complainant for the 
mental tension and harassment suffered by him and 
Rs.30,000/- as costs of litigation. The opposite party shall 
also pay the interest paid by the complainant to State Bank 
of Hyderabad and State Bank of India on the loan taken 
from it and paid to the opposite party for the purchase of 
the flat as charged by the Bank from the complainant.”
(Emphasis supplied)
7.	
GMADA carried the matter in appeals to NCDRC. In the impugned 
order, reference is made to Greater Mahali Area Development 
388
Supreme Court Reports
Authority v. Priyanka Naiyyar6, which was also referred to by the 
State Commission, where the Commission had granted compensation 
of ₹2 lakhs to the complainant in addition to the 8% interest, which 
was to be given on account of the fact that the interest charged by 
the bank in the case was @ 10.75%. It was concluded that there 
was no merit in the appeals which were dismissed on the grounds 
of delay and merit, along with costs quantified at ₹20,000/- each to 
be paid to both the respondents herein.
8.	
Aggrieved by this order, GMADA is before us. Notice was issued on 
8th November, 2019 limited to that part of the order by which interest 
has been awarded on the loan taken by the respondent-Anupam 
Garg from the State Bank of India in addition to the 8% compounded 
interest already granted.
9.	
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. 
10.	 The appellants’ case is that casting liability for the respondents’ 
loan upon GMADA is not a position under law. In contrast, the 
respondents argue to the contrary, stating that the Commissions 
have the requisite authority to grant compensation over and above 
what is agreed in the contract. It is their case that the terms of the 
agreement cannot circumscribe the authority of the Commission to 
award just compensation. 
11.	 In Bangalore Development Authority v. Syndicate Bank7, this 
Court having surveyed several other judgments, laid down seven 
principles regarding grant/non-grant of relief to an allottee who is 
aggrieved by non-delivery or delay in delivery of plots/flats. This case 
is covered by the first one, which is as follows :
“(a) Where the development authority having received the 
full price, does not deliver possession of the allotted plot/
flat/house within the time stipulated or within a reasonable 
time, or where the allotment is cancelled or possession 
is refused without any justifiable cause, the allottee is 
entitled for refund of the amount paid, with reasonable 
interest thereon from the date of payment to date of 
6	
1st appeal No. 1456 of 2016
7	
(2007) 6 SCC 711
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
389
Greater Mohali Area Development Authority (GMADA) Through Its 
Estate Officer (H) v. Anupam Garg Etc.
refund. In addition, the allottee may also be entitled to 
compensation, as may be decided with reference to the 
facts of each case.”
12.	 The observations made in GDA v. Balbir Singh8 are also important 
when it comes to the determination of compensation. It was held 
as under :
“…Thus the Forum or the Commission must determine that 
there has been deficiency in service and/or misfeasance in 
public office which has resulted in loss or injury. No hard-
and-fast rule can be laid down, however, a few examples 
would be where an allotment is made, price is received/
paid but possession is not given within the period set out 
in the brochure. The Commission/Forum would then need 
to determine the loss. Loss could be determined on basis 
of loss of rent which could have been earned if possession 
was given and the premises let out or if the consumer 
has had to stay in rented premises then on basis of rent 
actually paid by him. Along with recompensing the loss the 
Commission/Forum may also compensate for harassment/
injury, both mental and physical. Similarly, compensation 
can be given if after allotment is made there has been 
cancellation of scheme without any justifiable cause.
9. That compensation cannot be uniform and can best be 
illustrated by considering cases where possession is being 
directed to be delivered and cases where only monies 
are directed to be returned. In cases where possession 
is being directed to be delivered the compensation for 
harassment will necessarily have to be less because in a 
way that party is being compensated by increase in the 
value of the property he is getting. But in cases where 
monies are being simply returned then the party is suffering 
a loss inasmuch as he had deposited the money in the 
hope of getting a flat/plot. He is being deprived of that flat/
plot. He has been deprived of the benefit of escalation of 
the price of that flat/plot. Therefore the compensation in 
8	
(2004) 5 SCC 65
390
Supreme Court Reports
such cases would necessarily have to be higher. Further 
if the construction is not of good quality or not complete, 
the compensation would be the cost of putting it in good 
shape or completing it along with some compensation for 
harassment. Similarly, if at the time of giving possession 
a higher price or other amounts are collected unjustifiably 
and without there being any provision for the same the 
direction would be to refund it with a reasonable rate of 
interest. If possession is refused or not given because 
the consumer has refused to pay the amount, then on the 
finding that the demand was unjustified the consumer can 
be compensated for harassment and a direction to deliver 
possession can be given. If a party who has paid the 
amount is told by the authority that they are not in a position 
to ascertain whether he has paid the amount and that party 
is made to run from pillar to post in order to show that he 
has paid the amount, there would be deficiency of service 
for which compensation for harassment must be awarded 
depending on the extent of harassment. Similarly, if after 
delivery of possession, the sale deeds or title deeds are not 
executed without any justifiable reasons, the compensation 
would depend on the amount of harassment suffered. We 
clarify that the above are mere examples. They are not 
exhaustive. The above shows that compensation cannot 
be the same in all cases irrespective of the type of loss 
or injury suffered by the consumer.”
13.	 The entitlement of compensation, therefore, is not in dispute. A 
reference to Balbir Singh (supra) shows that compensation can take 
different forms, considering the facts and circumstances at hand. 
Determination has to be made, keeping in view the stage of the work 
completed, where the service provider has lapsed in duty and the 
loss caused thereby etc. Uniformity is foreign to such determination. 
Here only we may observe that the State Commission, as well as 
NCDRC’s reliance on Priyanka Nayyar (supra) is misplaced. In that 
case, ₹ 2 lakhs was given as compensation, taking into account 
that the complainant had suffered interest in the loan taken at the 
rate of 10.75%. It was not given as payment for the interest itself. 
By placing reliance on this order, against which one special leave 
petition indeed stands dismissed, what was open for the commission 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
391
Greater Mohali Area Development Authority (GMADA) Through Its 
Estate Officer (H) v. Anupam Garg Etc.
to do was to, in the attending facts and circumstances, compute an 
amount as compensation, in which one of the factors would be that 
in order to secure a property in the scheme floated by the GMADA, 
the respondents had taken out a loan and would be liable to pay 
interest thereon. However, this order does not permit the interest on 
the loan, in its entirety, to be saddled by the authority responsible 
for the housing scheme and the delay, which is the genesis of the 
dispute.
14.	 We are supported in this view by the findings made by a coordinate 
Bench of this Court in DLF Homes Panchkula (P) Ltd. v. D.S. 
Dhanda9, which is extracted as under :
“15. The District Forum under the Consumer Protection 
Act, 1986 (“the 1986 Act”) is empowered inter alia to 
order the opposite party to pay such amount as may be 
awarded as compensation to the consumer for any loss 
or injury suffered by the consumer due to the negligence 
of the opposite party including to grant punitive damages. 
But the forums under the Act cannot award interest and/
or compensation by applying rule of thumb. The order to 
grant interest at the maximum of rate of interest charged 
by nationalised bank for advancing home loan is arbitrary 
and has no nexus with the default committed. The appellant 
has agreed to deliver constructed flats. For delay in 
handing over possession, the consumer is entitled to the 
consequences agreed at the time of executing buyer’s 
agreement. There cannot be multiple heads to grant of 
damages and interest when the parties have agreed for 
payment of damages @ Rs 10 per square foot per month. 
Once the parties agreed for a particular consequence of 
delay in handing over of possession then, there have to be 
exceptional and strong reasons for Scdrc/Ncdrc to award 
compensation at more than the agreed rate.”
(Emphasis supplied)
15.	 A perusal of the judgment and orders of the Commissions does not 
reveal any exceptional or strong reasons for the interest on the loan 
9	
(2020) 16 SCC 318
392
Supreme Court Reports
taken by the respondents to be paid by GMADA. That apart, whether 
the buyers of the flat do so by utilizing their savings, taking a loan 
for such purpose or securing the required finances by any other 
permissible means, is not a consideration that the developer of the 
project is required to keep in mind. For, so far as they are concerned, 
such a consideration is irrelevant. The one who is buying a flat is a 
consumer, and the one who is building it is a service provider. That 
is the only relationship between the parties. If there is a deficiency 
or delay in service, the consumer is entitled to be compensated 
for the same. Repayment of the entire principal amount along with 
8% interest thereon, as stipulated in the contract, alongside the 
clarification that there shall be no other liability on the authority, 
sufficiently meets this requirement.
16.	 In DLF Homes Panchkula (P) Ltd. (supra), it was also observed 
as follows:
“17. This Court in a judgment reported as Irrigation 
Department, State of Orissa v. G.C. Roy [Irrigation 
Department, State of Orissa v. G.C. Roy, (1992) 1 SCC 
508] examined the question as to whether an arbitrator 
has the power to award interest pendente lite. It was held 
that a person deprived of use of money to which he is 
legitimately entitled has a right to be compensated for the 
deprivation which may be called interest, compensation 
or damages. Thus, keeping in view the said principle laid 
down in the aforesaid judgment, the amount of the interest 
is the compensation to the beneficiary deprived of the use 
of the investment made by the complainant. Therefore, such 
interest will take into its ambit, the consequences of delay 
in not handing over his possession. In fact, we find that the 
learned Scdrc as well as Ncdrc has awarded compensation 
under different heads on account of singular default of 
not handing over possession. Such award under various 
heads in respect of the same default is not sustainable.”
(Emphasis supplied)
17.	 What flows from the above is that the amount of interest awarded is 
the compensation to the investment maker for the amount of money 
and the time he has been denied the fruits of that investment. The 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
393
Greater Mohali Area Development Authority (GMADA) Through Its 
Estate Officer (H) v. Anupam Garg Etc.
8% interest awarded in this case on top of the entire amount that 
is being invested, is the compensation for being deprived of the 
investment of that money. Apart from this no amount of interest on 
the loan taken by the respondents could have been awarded.
18.	 We clarify that we have in no way held that the Commission is not 
empowered to give compensation, generally. For that reason, we 
do not interfere with the award of certain amounts on account of 
mental agony and litigation costs. We have only interfered with that 
part of the order as set out in the notice. It has come on record 
that the amount deposited before the State Commission does not 
include the amount of interest on the loan. In view of the above 
discussion, we hold that there is no requirement for GMADA to make 
any further deposit. The amount as it stands currently, be dispersed 
to the respondents.
19.	 The appeals are allowed. Pending applications, if any, shall stand 
disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain