[2025] 9 S.C.R. 258 : 2025 INSC 1061
Sushil Kumar Tiwari 
v. 
Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 3813 of 2025)
01 September 2025
[Sanjay Kumar and Satish Chandra Sharma,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Allegation against the respondent nos.1 and 2 that they raped a 
minor girl. It is admitted that they never committed the acts together 
and always acted separately. In light of the controversy involved in 
the instant case, the two question arise for consideration: i) whether 
the High Court fell in a grave error in acquitting the respondent 
nos.1 and 2 by holding that the prosecution failed to discharge its 
evidentiary burden as the evidence led by the prosecution was full 
of inconsistencies and contradictions; ii) whether the High Court 
erred in its finding that the trial was carried out in violation of s.223 
Cr.PC and non-adherence to the same had caused prejudice to the 
respondent nos.1 and 2, thereby leading to miscarriage of justice.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – s.376(2) – Protection of Children from 
Sexual Offences Act, 2012 – ss.4 and 6 – Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 – s.223 – Prosecution case that respondent 
nos.1 and 2 raped a minor girl, though separately – Girl became 
pregnant – Upon questioning, she disclosed names of the 
respondent nos.1 and 2 – Trial Court convicted respondent 
nos.1 and 2 u/s.376(2) of IPC and ss.4 and 6 of POCSO Act, 
2012 – However, the High court held that the prosecution 
did not succeed in proving the case against the respondent 
nos.1 and 2 – The High Court outlined a few specific issues 
in the case i.e. victim’s age, date and time of incident, proof 
of pregnancy and abortion, and delay in lodging the FIR – 
Correctness:
Held: 1. In the instant case, a fairly consistent and creditworthy 
case of the prosecution has been discarded on what could only be 
termed as misapplication of procedure – No culprit should manage 
* Author
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
259
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
an acquittal on basis of unreasonable doubts – The impugned 
judgment of the High Court is set aside being unsustainable – The 
view taken by the Trial Court was correct and there is no infirmity 
in the same – The judgment of the Trial Court stands restored, 
both on conviction and sentence. [Paras 36, 37, 38]
2. It cannot be denied that there are slight variations in the age of the 
victim at the relevant point of time, as discernible from the oral and 
documentary evidence – However, it cannot be said that age was 
not proved during the trial – The oral testimonies of PW-3, PW-5 and 
PW6 are consistent inter-se as well as with the Transfer Certificate 
issued by the government school – The age of the victim appears 
to be within the range of 12-13 years at the relevant point of time – 
Also, age was not challenged during the cross-examination of any 
witnesses – As long as the age conclusively appears to be under 
18 years, the special protections carved out in favour of children 
cannot be diluted by insisting upon a rigid determination of the 
age – As regards the issue regarding date and time of the incident, 
the main witness pertaining to the commission of the offence is the 
victim herself, examined as PW-2 – She has expressed the entire 
chain in a consistent manner and her version is also consistent 
with other PWs – She has deposed that the offence took place in 
the days following the festival of Holi and the same is corroborated 
by the medical report dated 01.07.2016, which indicates that she 
was 3-4 months pregnant as on 01.07.2016 – The medical report 
corroborates the time frame stated by the victim – The testimony 
of the victim is fairly consistent and there is no reasonable ground 
to doubt the same – As far as proof of pregnancy and abortion 
is concerned, the medical report dated 01.07.2016 categorically 
indicated that at the time of ultrasound, the victim was 15 weeks 
pregnant – Further, the Trial Court has noted that the letter dated 
28.07.2016 bearing Letter No. 60/BSLSA/AccT/2472 issued by 
the Bihar State Legal Services Authority indicated that the victim’s 
father had sought permission for her abortion – That abortion was 
conducted after the constitution of medical board by the Executive 
Chairman, BSLSA, Patna High Court, a fact which has not been 
disputed – There is ample documentary and oral evidence to 
prove these elements and the High Court has overlooked relevant 
evidence in arriving at its finding – As regards the delay in lodging 
the FIR, the incident came to light only after the ultrasound 
conducted on 01.07.2016 and the FIR was lodged on the very next 
day – Before the discovery of offence, the delay of 3-4 months 
260
Supreme Court Reports
was a consequence of the intimidation made by the respondent 
nos.1 and 2, which prevented the victim from opening up before 
her parents – So, the victim could be faulted in any manner on 
account of delay. [Paras 17, 19, 20, 21]
Penal Code, 1860 – s.376(2) – Protection of Children from 
Sexual Offences Act, 2012 – ss.4 and 6 – Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 – s.223 – Trial Court convicted respondent 
nos.1 and 2 u/s.376(2) of IPC and ss.4 and 6 of POCSO Act, 
2012 for raping a minor girl – Respondents never committed 
the acts together and always acted separately – The High 
Court emphasized the non-compliance of s.223 Cr.PC:
Held: The victim and the respondent nos.1 and 2 were residing 
in the same village, the house of respondent no.2 was situated 
one house away from that of the victim, respondent no.1 was 
running a coaching center adjacent to his house and in the same 
vicinity, and both the respondents threatened the victim of similar 
consequences if she dared to disclose their acts to anyone – 
Evidently, the nature of acts committed by the respondent nos.1 
and 2 herein and subsequent intimidation to keep the victim silent 
were of a similar design – Further, there was a certain proximity of 
time and place as the incidents were committed within a continuous 
time-frame and at different places in the same village – However, 
it is also admitted that they never committed the acts together and 
always acted separately – Therefore, there is no direct evidence 
of commission of offences in the same transaction, however, an 
inference may be drawn – For, even if the conclusion of the High 
Court, that the joint trial was conducted in violation of s.223 Cr.PC, 
is accepted, the respondent nos.1 and 2 would still have to further 
show that the joint trial had caused prejudice to them and had 
occasioned a failure of justice – Mere irregular conduct of a joint or 
separate trial does not vitiate the trial as a whole and the proof of 
failure of justice is sine qua non for holding the trial as invalid – In 
the High Court’s reasoning, there is no finding of actual prejudice 
or failure of justice as a result of the joint trial, as necessitated by 
law – Mere non-compliance of the procedure contemplated u/s.223 
does not ipso facto render the trial as invalid, and the same cannot 
form the basis of returning a finding of prejudice and failure of 
justice – The said conclusion must emanate from the facts of the 
case, after a thorough examination of the facts and evidence on 
record. [Paras 31, 34]
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
261
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
Evidence – Standard of reasonable doubt:
Held: One of the foremost principles of appreciation of evidence 
is that natural variations, errors and inconsistencies are not to be 
elevated to the standard of a reasonable doubt or to hold that the 
prosecution has failed – There is nothing like perfect evidence in 
a Court and in fact, perfection is often suggestive of tutoring and 
manufacturing of evidence – The availability of evidence as well 
as the quality of evidence are not open to judgment on any pre-
determined parameters – For, these aspects not only depend upon 
the quality of investigation but also upon the societal circumstances 
prevalent in the area of crime – They also depend upon the level of 
awareness, not only of the persons involved in the case but also of the 
members of the locality who often appear as witnesses – Therefore, 
the Courts must be alive to the state of affairs on the ground and in 
that backdrop, it must examine whether the inconsistencies and gaps 
have been properly explained or not – If so, such inconsistencies 
and gaps may not affect the case of the prosecution – However, if 
the prosecution fails to explain the inconsistencies in its case, an 
adverse inference may be drawn against it. [Para 22]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.464 – Whether mere 
discovery of an error, irregularity or omission in the framing of 
charge ipso facto render the decision of the Court as invalid:
Held: Mere discovery of an error, irregularity or omission in the 
framing of charge does not ipso facto render the decision of the 
Court as invalid – In fact, even a case of non-framing of charge is 
not liable to be discarded on that ground alone – In order to vitiate 
the decision, what is necessary is the failure of justice as a result 
of such error or omission or irregularity – Thus, the quintessential 
issue that requires an answer is whether the defect in the framing 
of charge in the instant matter has occasioned a failure of justice 
for the respondent nos.1 and 2. [Para 26]
Case Law Cited
Nasib Singh v. State of Punjab and Another, 2021 INSC 642 : 
[2021] 13 SCR 566 – relied on.
Krishan Kumar Malik v. State of Haryana [2011] 8 SCR 774 : 
(2011) 7 SCC 130 – held inapplicable.
Soundarajan v. State (Represented by the Inspector of Police, 
Vigilance Anti-Corruption, Dindigul) [2023] 4 SCR 133 : (2023) 16 
262
Supreme Court Reports
SCC 141; State of Andhra Pradesh v. Cheemalapati Ganeswara 
Rao and Another [1964] 3 SCR 297 : AIR 1963 SC 1850 – 
referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Protection of Children from Sexual Offences 
(POCSO) Act, 2012; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Juvenile 
Justice (Care & Protection) Act, 2015.
List of Keywords
Rape; Minor girl; Framing of charge; Irregularity; Evidence; Standard 
of reasonable doubt; Natural variations; Perfect evidence; Quality 
of evidence; Section 223 of CrPC; Non-compliance of s.223 Cr.PC; 
Victim’s age; Date and time of incident; Proof of pregnancy; Abortion; 
Delay in lodging the FIR.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
3813 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 26.09.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Patna in CRADB No. 1124 of 2019
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Daksha Kumar, Ms. Tanishq Mehta, Aftab Ali Khan, Ms. Ankita 
Baluni, Deepak Kumar, Ms. Sonakshi Monga.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Talib Mustafa, Ms. Raksha Agrawal, Lzafeer Ahmad B. F., Manish 
Kumar, Shashwat Pratyush.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Satish Chandra Sharma, J.
1.	
Leave granted. 
2.	
The struggle for sensitivity towards offences against women, children 
and other marginalized groups passes through various phases of 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
263
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
evolution. Whereas, the end goal is most desirable, the journey is not 
always a pleasant one. At times, the victims find themselves pitched 
against a system full of insensitive stakeholders and at other times, 
the victims find themselves in conflict with the procedural intricacies 
of the laws in place. Despite the importance of procedural sanctity, 
it is always a matter of utter failure for the system as a whole when 
a culprit, that too of a heinous sexual offence, manages to walk free 
by entangling the victim in misapplication of procedural rules, without 
the knowledge of the victim and without any control of the victim. 
The present case presents one such illustration from a place called 
Piro, District Bhojpur, Bihar. 
3.	
In 2016, a few months after the festival of Holi, the victim - the 
appellant’s daughter – started feeling unwell. Upon finding that her 
health was constantly deteriorating, the appellant’s wife took their 
daughter to her native place in Ballia, Uttar Pradesh for treatment. 
There, she was taken to Zila Mahila Chikitsalaya on 01.07.2016 and 
upon examination, the victim was found to be 3 months pregnant. 
Upon questioning, she disclosed that she was raped by the 
respondents, namely, Hare Ram Sah and Manish Tiwari about 3-4 
months ago, sometime after the festival of Holi. On the strength of 
this disclosure, the appellant lodged a complaint at PS Piro, District 
Bhojpur, Bihar on 02.07.2016, which culminated into FIR/Criminal 
Case No. 209/2016. Investigation commenced and chargesheet was 
filed in the concerned Court. 
4.	
After trial, Learned Additional District & Sessions Judge-cum-Special 
Judge, POCSO Act, Bhojpur at Ara found the Respondent Nos. 1 
and 2 guilty for the commission of offences under Sections 376(2) 
of Indian Penal Code, 18601, and Sections 4 & 6 of Protection 
of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, 20122. For the 
commission of the offence under Section 376 IPC, the Respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 were sentenced to undergo rigorous life imprisonment 
along with a fine of Rs. 50,000/- each. In default of payment of fine, 
additional sentence of imprisonment for one year was imposed. For 
the commission of the offence under Section 6 of POCSO Act, the 
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were sentenced to undergo rigorous life 
1	
Hereinafter referred as “IPC”
2	
Hereinafter referred as “POCSO Act”
264
Supreme Court Reports
imprisonment along with a fine of Rs. 25,000/- each. In default of 
payment of fine, additional sentence of imprisonment for one year 
was imposed. For the commission of the offence under Section 
4 of POCSO Act, the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were sentenced 
to undergo rigorous imprisonment of 7 years along with a fine of 
Rs. 10,000/- each. In default of payment of fine, additional sentence 
of imprisonment for three months was imposed. The sentences were 
directed to run concurrently. 
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT
5.	
In appeal, the High Court examined the entire evidence on record 
and came to the conclusion that the prosecution did not succeed 
in proving the case against the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2. In doing 
so, the High Court primarily found the following infirmities in the 
prosecution case:
i.	
The date and time of the alleged incident were not proved;
ii.	
The determination of age of the victim was not carried out;
iii.	
No proof of abortion of the victim was placed on record;
iv.	
The charge was not framed properly as it recorded the date as 
02.07.2016, whereas the incident was reported on 01.07.2016 
and offence was committed 3-4 months prior to its reporting;
v.	
The Trial Court committed an error in conducting the joint trial 
of the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, despite the case not falling 
within the conditions stipulated in Section 223 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 19733 for conducting joint trial. The High 
Court observed that the trial was bad in law, as the Respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 were accused of committing different offences 
committed at different points of time, and the joinder of trial had 
caused grave prejudice to them and led to miscarriage of justice. 
6.	
The High Court emphasized that in addition to the procedural infirmities 
that resulted from the non-compliance of Section 223 Cr.P.C., there 
were major inconsistencies in the deposition of prosecution witnesses. 
However, it clarified that the conviction was not set aside solely due 
to procedural lapses. The relevant para reads thus:
3	
Hereinafter referred as “Cr.P.C.”
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
265
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
“42. As per the principles laid down by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, and the two pronged test satisfies this 
case that the joint trial conducted has prejudiced the 
defence of the accused and has successfully proven to 
cause a miscarriage of justice. In view of the aforesaid 
facts and circumstances of the present case, we are 
of the view that the prosecution has failed to prove the 
case on various grounds. The conviction of the present 
appellants is not being set aside on the mere ground that 
the procedure of Section 223 of the Code has not been 
adhered to but there are numerous laches on the part of 
the prosecution in proving the case beyond reasonable 
doubt. The learned Trial Court has also failed to consider 
the fact that Section 223 was applicable in this matter, 
but the same has not been considered in this case and 
the appellants have been tried jointly, causing prejudice 
to the appellants, despite which, the learned Trial Court 
has recorded the impugned judgment of conviction and 
the order of sentence. As such, the same are required to 
be quashed and set aside.”
THE CHALLENGE
7.	
Taking exception to the impugned judgment, Learned Counsel on 
behalf of the appellant submits that the High Court fell in a grave 
error in concluding that prejudice was caused to the Respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 due to non-compliance of Section 223 Cr.P.C. He 
submits that the ground qua non-compliance of Section 223 was 
never taken by the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and the High Court 
examined the same on its own. To buttress the submission, it is 
submitted that even if Section 223 was not complied, it did not 
cause any prejudice to the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and they 
had sufficient opportunity to participate and defend themselves 
during the trial. 
8.	
It is further submitted that the age of the victim was established to 
be under 18 years without any doubt, on the strength of the school 
transfer certificate, statement of the victim under Section 164 Cr.P.C. 
and the medical report dated 01.07.2016. It is further submitted 
that there was no reason to doubt the testimony of the victim and 
in a case of this nature, the testimony of the victim could form the 
266
Supreme Court Reports
sole basis of conviction. It is further submitted that the aspects of 
pregnancy and abortion were duly proved in the case on the basis 
of the medical reports and abortion papers.
9.	
It is further submitted that there was no enmity between the victim 
and the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and thus, there was no motive 
to implicate the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2. It is further submitted 
that even if the High Court had found any procedural irregularity, 
it ought to have remanded the matter back for fresh adjudication 
instead of acquitting the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2. To buttress, it is 
submitted that the impugned decision completely disregarded the 
rights of the victim. 
10.	 Per contra, the respondents advanced submissions in support of 
the impugned decision. On their behalf, it is submitted that the 
investigation was carried out in a completely casual and negligent 
manner and the same cause prejudice to the Respondent Nos. 
1 and 2. The submissions draw attention to the aspects of age 
determination, absence of proof of pregnancy and abortion, lack of 
investigation qua the date, time and place of the incidents, etc. It is 
further submitted that the charges framed by the Trial Court were 
defective and the entire trial was conducted on the basis of defective 
charges, thereby disentitling the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 from a 
fair participation. 
11.	 It is further submitted that the Trial Court conducted a joint trial 
of the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in utter violation of Section 223 
Cr.P.C. and without fulfilment of the conditions contemplated 
thereunder. It is further submitted that even at the stage of Section 
313 Cr.P.C., the incriminating evidence was not put properly to 
the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and consequently, the Respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 were prevented from explaining the evidence against 
them in a proper manner. Further, it is submitted that the version 
of the prosecution witnesses, especially that of the victim, was 
not consistent and the Trial Court committed an error in placing 
reliance upon their testimonies. It is further submitted that the 
defence witnesses presented a valid defence and the same out to 
have been considered. 
12.	 Both the parties have filed written submissions and compilation of 
judgments in support of their case. We have considered the same. 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
267
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
DISCUSSION
13.	 We have carefully considered the contentions advanced by the parties, 
impugned judgment, judgment of the Trial Court and the decisions 
relied upon by the parties. In light of the controversy involved in the 
matter, the following two issues arise for our consideration:
i.	
Whether the High Court fell in a grave error in acquitting the 
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 by holding that the prosecution failed 
to discharge its evidentiary burden as the evidence led by the 
prosecution was full of inconsistencies and contradictions? 
ii.	
Whether the High Court erred in its finding that the trial was 
carried out in violation of Section 223 Cr.P.C. and non-adherence 
to the same had caused prejudice to the Respondent Nos. 1 
and 2, thereby leading to miscarriage of justice? 
14.	 We may first consider the issue regarding inconsistencies and 
contradictions in the prosecution evidence, which would require some 
degree of examination of the evidence on record. At the outset, it 
needs to be noted that the High Court has outlined a few specific 
issues in the case i.e. victim’s age, date and time of the incident, 
proof of pregnancy and abortion, and delay in lodging the FIR. 
15.	 Before appreciation of evidence led on these aspects, we may first 
traverse through the testimony of the victim, examined before the 
Trial Court as PW-2, in order to understand the precise allegations. 
After the discovery of pregnancy, PW-2 deposed that the incident 
took place in 2016, a few days after the festival of Holi. She deposed 
that one afternoon, her mother and father were not at home and 
she was sleeping alone in the house. Respondent No. 2 Manish 
Tiwari entered the house and raped her, and before leaving, he 
threatened her saying that should she tell anyone about it, she would 
be killed. Two or three days after this incident, the victim went near 
Shivala in the evening hours to look for her brother Himanshu. On 
the way, she passed respondent No. 1 Hare Ram Sah’s room and 
inquired if he had seen her brother. The said respondent pointed 
towards an inner room (used as coaching center) and suggested to 
the victim that her brother had gone in that direction. She went to 
check inside the room and found no one there. At the same time, 
Hare Ram Sah came from behind and grabbed her. She deposed 
that he took her inside and raped her. He also threatened her by 
268
Supreme Court Reports
saying that should she tell anyone about it, she would be killed. The 
victim further deposed that she got scared and told no one about 
it. The story does not end here. She further deposed that after this 
incident, for two-three successive months, the Respondent Nos. 
1 and 2 took turns and raped her multiple times. Thereafter, she 
fell sick and started experiencing stomach pain and vomiting. She 
informed her mother and her mother firstly took her to a doctor in 
Ara. Despite administration of medicines, her health did not improve. 
Thereafter, the victim was taken to her maternal uncle’s house in 
Ballia, Uttar Pradesh, where an ultrasound was conducted and the 
pregnancy was discovered. It is noteworthy that the statement of the 
victim recorded by the police, statement recorded by the concerned 
Magistrate under Section 164 Cr.P.C. and the deposition recorded 
in the Court, are fairly consistent. There appears to be no variance 
insofar as the material aspects of the offence are concerned. 
16.	 As regards the first issue concerning the age of the victim, it is quite 
understandable that for an offence under the POCSO Act, the victim 
must be aged under 18 years. In order to prove so, the prosecution has 
relied upon both oral and documentary evidence. The oral testimony 
of the mother of the victim, examined before the Trial Court as PW-
3, reveals that the victim was 12 years old at the time of incident. 
Further, the statement of victim under Section 164 Cr.P.C. also bears 
an endorsement regarding her age. The concerned ACJM, examined 
as PW-4, has recorded her age as 13 years. The father of the victim, 
examined as PW-5, has deposed that the victim’s age at the time 
of incident was 12 years. Insofar as the documentary evidence is 
concerned, the Transfer Certificate (Annexure P-10) issued by the 
government school attended by the victim records her date of birth as 
03.10.2004, thereby meaning that during the concerned time-frame 
of the year 2016, the victim was around 12 years old. The medical 
report dated 01.07.2016 (Annexure P-1) is also relevant on this aspect. 
The said medical report pertains to the ultrasound examination of the 
victim and records her age as 15 years. 
17.	 It cannot be denied that there are slight variations in the age of 
the victim at the relevant point of time, as discernible from the oral 
and documentary evidence. However, we do not find ourselves in 
agreement with the High Court that the age was not proved during 
trial. The oral testimonies of PW-3, PW-5 and PW-6 are consistent 
inter-se as well as with the Transfer Certificate issued by the 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
269
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
government school. The age of the victim appears to be within the 
range of 12-13 years at the relevant point of time. The medical 
report records the age as 15 years. However, we cannot lose sight 
of the fact that the age of the victim was not challenged during 
cross-examination of any of the witnesses mentioned above. Their 
testimonies, on the point of age, have largely remained unrebutted, 
thereby meaning that the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had no claim that 
she was not a minor at the relevant point. We do not mean to say in 
cases involving POCSO Act or Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection) 
Act, 2015, the determination of age is not required. Most certainly, 
the determination of minority is essential to extend the protection of 
these legislations, however, as long as the age conclusively appears 
to be under 18 years, the special protections carved out in favour of 
children cannot be diluted by insisting upon a rigid determination of 
the age, that too when it was not even questioned at the right time. 
In the present case, even if it is believed that the age of the victim 
was not determined to the hilt, the Trial Court had concluded that 
the victim was aged between 12 to 15 years at the relevant point 
of time and thus, was a minor. Thus, it could not be stated that the 
Trial Court had not determined the minority of the victim. It was done 
and, in our opinion, rightly so, on the basis of the unrebutted oral 
and documentary evidence. 
18.	 Interestingly, the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 neither claimed that the 
victim was not a minor at any point of time nor led any evidence to 
that effect. We find that the High Court has erred in raising a doubt 
where none existed, even inter-se the parties to the case. We are 
also of the opinion that once the minority of the victim was beyond 
doubt, the special protection of POCSO Act ought not to have been 
diluted by raising a fictious doubt regarding the precise age of the 
victim. For, the Courts must remain alive to the socio-economic 
circumstances of the victims, especially those who are based in 
remoter regions of the country. In rural regions, discrepancies in 
the educational and identification documents are not unknown and, 
in such circumstances, the Courts must be sensitive to the ground 
realities of the society, so as to ensure that the intent of the law is 
not suppressed and protections created by the legislature reach the 
intended persons in their right spirit. 
19.	 As regards the issue regarding date and time of the incident, the 
High Court has observed that the prosecution had failed to prove 
270
Supreme Court Reports
the date and time of the offence. In order to examine this aspect, 
we must appreciate the circumstances in which the offence was 
committed and discovered. The main witness pertaining to the 
commission of the offence is the victim herself, examined as PW-2. 
She has expressed the entire chain in a consistent manner and her 
version is also consistent with other PWs. She has deposed that 
the offence took place in the days following the festival of Holi and 
the same is corroborated by the medical report dated 01.07.2016, 
which indicates that she was 3-4 months pregnant as on 01.07.2016. 
The medical report corroborates the time frame stated by the victim. 
Further, as regards the time, the victim has deposed that the first 
incident took place during the afternoon and the second incident 
took place in the evening. Importantly, it is not a case wherein the 
victim reported the offence immediately after its commission. The 
victim was scared to report the incident to anyone as she was 
threatened by the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and probably, if not 
for the pregnancy and deterioration of health, she would not have 
reported either. Therefore, the inability of the victim, a minor girl, 
to recollect the precise time and date of the offence is completely 
natural. Furthermore, the victim has specified the places used for 
the commission of the alleged offence, including her house and 
coaching center of Respondent No. 1-Hare Ram Sah, and has also 
correctly identified both the respondent Nos. 1 and 2. during trial. 
Therefore, the victim has deposed in a completely natural manner 
and her inability to depose about some facts in precise terms is not 
only natural, but is also inconsequential as the medical report has 
corroborated the time-frame of the offence. The testimony of the 
victim is fairly consistent and there is no reasonable ground to doubt 
the same. Moreover, this deficiency has not caused any prejudice 
to the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2. 
20.	 As regards the proof of pregnancy and abortion, we find that the High 
Court has fell in a grave error by failing to acknowledge the evidence 
on record. The medical report dated 01.07.2016 categorically indicates 
that at the time of ultrasound, the victim was 15 weeks pregnant. In 
the subsequent examination conducted on 02.07.2016 at Ara, the 
victim was again found to be 16 weeks pregnant and in support of 
the same, PW-7 has deposed before the Trial Court. No infirmity has 
been pointed out in the examination of PW-7. The factum of abortion 
has been proved on the basis of the medical documents/Discharge 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
271
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
Ticket dated 30.07.2016 issued by Sadar Hospital, Ara. Further, the 
Trial Court has noted that the letter dated 28.07.2016 bearing Letter 
No. 60/BSLSA/AccT/2472 issued by the Bihar State Legal Services 
Authority indicated that the victim’s father had sought permission for 
her abortion. The said letter is Annexure P-4 and it aligns with the 
observation of the Trial Court. It is also averred that abortion was 
conducted after the constitution of medical board by the Executive 
Chairman, BSLSA, Patna High Court, a fact which has not been 
disputed. Thus, it appears preposterous to hold that the prosecution 
could not prove the elements of pregnancy and abortion. There is 
ample documentary and oral evidence to prove these elements 
and we feel that the High Court has overlooked relevant evidence 
in arriving at its finding. This fact was duly proved in the common 
course of natural events, but the natural events were overlooked. 
21.	 As regards the delay in lodging the FIR, we feel that the same has 
been appropriately explained. The incident came to light only after 
the ultrasound conducted on 01.07.2016 and the FIR was lodged 
on the very next day. Before the discovery of offence, the delay of 
3-4 months was a consequence of the intimidation made by the 
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, which prevented the victim from opening 
up before her parents. It is completely natural and understandable. 
We do not find that the victim could be faulted in any manner on 
account of delay. 
22.	 On an examination of the concerns, which formed the basis of the 
impugned decision, we are of the view that undue emphasis has 
been laid on these aspects by the High Court. One of the foremost 
principles of appreciation of evidence is that natural variations, 
errors and inconsistencies are not to be elevated to the standard of 
a reasonable doubt or to hold that the prosecution has failed. There 
is nothing like perfect evidence in a Court and in fact, perfection is 
often suggestive of tutoring and manufacturing of evidence. The 
availability of evidence as well as the quality of evidence are not 
open to judgment on any pre-determined parameters. For, these 
aspects not only depend upon the quality of investigation but also 
upon the societal circumstances prevalent in the area of crime. They 
also depend upon the level of awareness, not only of the persons 
involved in the case but also of the members of the locality who 
often appear as witnesses. Therefore, the Courts must be alive 
to the state of affairs on the ground and in that backdrop, it must 
272
Supreme Court Reports
examine whether the inconsistencies and gaps have been properly 
explained or not. If so, such inconsistencies and gaps may not 
affect the case of the prosecution. However, if the prosecution fails 
to explain the inconsistencies in its case, an adverse inference may 
be drawn against it. 
23.	 Be that as it may, the present case does not fall in such category, 
as the prosecution witnesses have invariably deposed in support of 
the version put across by the victim. The medical reports and other 
documentary evidence have corroborated the oral statement of the 
victim. Moreover, the oral statement of the victim has remained 
fairly consistent at all levels of the proceeding, including before the 
Magistrate who recorded her statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. 
and the Trial Court where she was subjected to cross examination. 
The version of the victim has remained completely natural and 
consistent with the chain of circumstances of the case. Despite cross-
examination, there is nothing to suggest that she is not creditworthy 
as a witness. 
24.	 Having said so, we do agree that better investigation could have been 
conducted in the present matter on certain aspects. For instance, 
the accused persons ought to have been tested for DNA analysis as 
it could have enabled more fool-proofing of the prosecution’s case. 
This argument has been taken by the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 
in the written submissions and reliance has been placed upon the 
decision of this Court in Krishan Kumar Malik v. State of Haryana4. 
We have carefully considered this aspect and are of the opinion that 
despite this error, the case of the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 cannot 
be advanced as it does not give rise to any reasonable doubt. It is 
so because the factual matrix of the present case is substantially 
distinct from that in Krishan Kumar Malik. In the said case, the 
version of the prosecutrix was found to be doubtful as she had failed 
to disclose the name of the accused in the FIR, despite admitting 
that she knew his name. She had also failed to explain the identity 
of the accused in an accurate manner and in fact, stated that the 
accused was a short-structured person, which was found to be 
contrary to his appearance. The prosecutrix had also concealed and 
falsely presented certain material aspects of the case. Thus, in this 
backdrop, the Court had observed that the prosecution had failed 
4	
(2011) 7 SCC 130
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
273
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
to prove the identity of the accused therein and DNA test ought to 
have been carried out to obtain scientific evidence of identification. 
However, in the present case, the victim has correctly named and 
identified both the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 right from the beginning 
of the case. In the Trial Court as well, she had correctly identified 
them and no doubt qua identity was raised at that stage. On the point 
of identity, the victim has not even been rebutted at any stage. The 
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have not shown any circumstance which 
could enable this Court to raise a question on the identification of 
the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 by the victim. Perhaps, there is none. 
Therefore, merely on account of non-availability of DNA analysis, the 
case of the prosecution cannot be discarded, especially because the 
purpose of identification has been fulfilled on the strength of other 
credible evidence. The reliance placed on Krishan Kumar Malik 
(supra) is, thus, wholly misplaced. 
25.	 Another important aspect that has weighed with the High Court is 
the manner of framing of charge by the Trial Court. On this aspect, 
the High Court has noted thus:
“25. The Code lays down various provisions with regard 
to the framing of charges against an accused. On perusal 
of charge sheet dated 06.12.2017, it is mentioned that the 
date of occurrence of the incident was on 02.07.2016, but 
the ferdbeyan dated 02.07.2016, states that the daughter of 
the informant was pregnant for three months and few days 
as according to the treatment of the victim which was done 
on 01.07.2016. Further, on perusal of the F.I.R and case 
diary, the statement of the victim which is in para-3 of the 
case diary dated 02.07.2016, she has stated that the first 
incident, where Manish Tiwary (appellant no. 2) raped her 
three to four months back during the time of Holi and after 
a few days, the victim stated that Hare Ram Sah (appellant 
no. 1) raped her while she was searching for her brother. 
It is factually impossible that the incident was reported on 
01.07.2016 and the charge was framed for the occurrence 
of incident dated 02.07.2016, but the ferdbeyan and the 
statement of the victim itself states that the incident had 
occurred three to four months before the F.I.R was filed.
26. Thus, it is clear to us that the charges framed are not 
in accordance with law and, thus, causing prejudice to the 
274
Supreme Court Reports
accused persons / appellants as mentioned in the trial court 
record. The framing of charge is the most basic step of 
the process of initiation of a trial in a criminal proceeding. 
Utmost care must be taken while the charges are being 
framed as wrong framing may lead to denial of justice. 
Therefore, one should abstain from wrongful framing and 
joinder of charges as such an inefficiency would vitiate the 
very basic essence of a fair trial.”
26.	 A perusal of the charge framed by the Trial Court in this matter reveals 
that the charge stated to the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 pertained to 
the commission of offences “on or about the 2nd day of July 2016”. It 
is an admitted position that the date of offence was a few days after 
the festival of Holi and 3-4 months prior to the date of discovery of 
the offence i.e. 01.07.2016. In fact, 2nd July, 2016 was the date of 
registration of FIR and the same has been put to the Respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 as the date of commission of the offences. We have 
no doubt in observing that the charge stated to the Respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 was not free from defects. Even if the exact date of 
commission of the offence was not known, the charge ought to have 
stated that the offences was committed before 2nd July 2016 and a 
few days after the festival of Holi, so as to correctly state the time 
frame. The Trial Court clearly fell in error in not doing so. However, 
the consequence of error or defect in charge is to be determined 
in a nuanced manner. Section 464 Cr.P.C. is of instructive value 
in this regard and it provides that no finding, sentence or order of 
any Court shall be deemed invalid merely on account of any error, 
omission or irregularity in the framing of charge, unless the same 
has occasioned any failure of justice. Sub-section (1) of Section 464 
Cr.P.C. reads thus:
“464. Effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or 
error in, charge.— (1) No finding, sentence or order by 
a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be deemed invalid 
merely on the ground that no charge was framed or on the 
ground of any error, omission or irregularity in the charge 
including any misjoinder of charges, unless, in the opinion 
of the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure 
of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.”
Thus, mere discovery of an error, irregularity or omission in the 
framing of charge does not ipso facto render the decision of the 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
275
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
Court as invalid. In fact, even a case of non-framing of charge is 
not liable to be discarded on that ground alone. In order to vitiate 
the decision, what is necessary is the failure of justice as a result 
of such error or omission or irregularity. Thus, the quintessential 
issue that requires an answer is whether the defect in the framing 
of charge in the instant matter has occasioned a failure of justice 
for the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2. In other words, has it prevented 
the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 from having a fair trial or has denied 
them any opportunity to present a valid defence before the Trial 
Court? We feel not. 
27.	 Ordinarily, in a criminal trial, the stage of charge is sandwiched 
between the stages of investigation and trial. It is the gateway 
to trial and prior to this stage, the stages of registration of FIR, 
filing of chargesheet and arguments on charge occur. During 
all these stages, the accused has a right to be informed, and is 
informed, about the allegations against him and the chargesheet 
finally culminates the entire case of the prosecution and makes it 
clearly known to the accused persons the colour and content of the 
allegations. Thus, on receipt of the chargesheet, the Respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 were conscious of the allegations. Merely for non-
statement of the correct date in the formal charge, it could not be 
said that the accused persons have been robbed of a fair trial or 
that failure of justice has been occasioned. Throughout the trial, 
there was no confusion regarding the date or time frame of the 
commission of the offence. Had there been so, the error in charge 
could have been suitably corrected under Section 216 Cr.P.C. 
However, the error in question did not have the effect of misleading 
the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in any manner during the trial. Section 
215 Cr.P.C., which finds place in the chapter of “Charge” and deals 
with the effect of errors, also provides that no error in the framing 
of charge shall be regarded as material, unless it has the effect of 
misleading the accused and results into failure of justice. In this 
matter, there is no explanation as to how the Respondent Nos. 
1 and 2were misled by the charge or had suffered any failure of 
justice. During their statements under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and 
defence evidence as well, the allegations were fully addressed by 
the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 without any confusion with respect 
to the time-frame of offence. The time frame alleged by the victim 
was well known to the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and there was no 
276
Supreme Court Reports
occasion for any confusion on that count, let aside any failure of 
justice. The decision relied upon by the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, 
rendered by this Court in Soundarajan v. State (Represented by 
the Inspector of Police, Vigilance Anti-Corruption, Dindigul)5, 
is of no consequence in the present matter. Ironically, in the said 
decision, the contention regarding failure of justice due to defective 
framing of charge was turned down by the Court. Despite finding 
that non-statement of correct date in the charge had rendered 
the charge as defective, the Court went on to hold that it had not 
occasioned any failure of justice. 
28.	 Nevertheless, we consider it a fit matter to call upon the Trial Courts 
to be vigilant and cautious in framing of charges. The prosecutors 
representing the State are also duty bound to render suitable 
assistance during the trial and to remain vigilant in identifying the 
errors in statement of charges. For, timely intervention is always 
better in a trial and the criminal procedure provides ample provisions 
for rectifying the mistakes in framing of charges during the trial 
itself. The identification of such mistakes at appellate stages, which 
could have easily been spotted and corrected during the trial, does 
not only affect the finality of cases but also affects the credibility 
of the criminal justice system as a whole. The Trial Court does 
the job of raising the building from the scratch, brick by brick. In 
the performance of this onerous task, some mistakes are quite 
natural. While finding defects in the building, the Appellate Court 
must carefully weigh the mistakes and analyze their consequence 
on the outcome of the trial. We may suffice to observe that not 
every mistake is fatal. 
29.	 As an extension of the same discussion, we must also refer to 
the next ground of contention i.e. non-compliance of Section 223 
Cr.P.C. The High Court has observed that the joinder of trial of both 
the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 was impermissible and consequently, 
the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have been prejudiced before the Trial 
Court. Ordinarily, distinct offences committed by different persons are 
to be tried separately. The principle becomes clear from a reading of 
Section 218 Cr.P.C. However, from Sections 219 to 223 of Cr.P.C., 
various situations are envisaged wherein multiple offences committed 
5	
(2023) 16 SCC 141
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
277
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
by the same person could be tried together or different offences 
committed by different persons could be tried together. Whereas, 
a joint trial of different offences committed by the same person is 
contingent upon the fulfilment of the conditions envisaged in Sections 
219 to 221; a joint trial of different offences committed by different 
persons is solely governed by Section 223. In the present case, we 
are concerned with the second scenario. 
30.	 Section 223 lays down various conditions wherein different persons 
who have committed different offences could be charged and tried 
jointly. Amongst other things, it provides that the persons alleged of 
committing different offences, but as a part of the same transaction, 
could be charged and tried jointly. It is contended that the offences 
alleged upon the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 pertained to two completely 
independent acts and thus, they could not be considered to have 
formed part of the same transaction. It has also been contended that 
there was no allegation qua commission of any offence jointly by the 
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2. It is stated that the incidents took place 
at different points of time and there was no unity between them. The 
High Court has accepted this factual position. The statement of the 
victim reveals that allegations pertain to two specific instances of rape 
along with a general allegation that for 2-3 months, the Respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 continued to rape her. However, we cannot lose sight 
of the fact that there is no direct allegation that the offences were 
committed together by the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and on a 
plain view of the matter, it is not a case wherein the principles of 
common intention under Section 34 of IPC or conspiracy would be 
attracted. The only question is whether the offences committed by 
the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 formed part of the same transaction, 
so as to attract clause (d) of Section 223 Cr.P.C., which permits 
joint trial of persons accused of different offences committed in the 
course of the same transaction. 
31.	 In criminal law, the question whether certain acts and omissions 
form part of the same transaction often troubles the Courts. There 
is no definition of “same transaction” in the Code and more often 
than not, this determination is contingent upon the peculiar facts 
and circumstances of the case. To make it judicially determinable, 
we have often applied the three tests of “unity of purpose and 
design”, “proximity of time or place” and “continuity of action”. 
Reference may be drawn to the decision of this Court in State 
278
Supreme Court Reports
of Andhra Pradesh  Vs. Cheemalapati Ganeswara Rao and 
another6. Let us have a look at some admitted facts. The victim 
and the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were residing in the same 
village, the house of respondent No. 2-Manish Tiwari was situated 
one house away from that of the victim, respondent No. 2-Manish 
had taken the victim’s father to hospital a few days prior to the 
incident, respondent No. 1-Hare Ram Sah was running a coaching 
center adjacent to his house and in the same vicinity, and both the 
respondents threatened the victim of similar consequences if she 
dared to disclose their acts to anyone. Evidently, the nature of acts 
committed by the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein and subsequent 
intimidation to keep the victim silent were of a similar design. Further, 
there was a certain proximity of time and place as the incidents 
were committed within a continuous time-frame and at different 
places in the same village. However, it is also admitted that they 
never committed the acts together and always acted separately. 
Therefore, there is no direct evidence of commission of offences 
in the same transaction, however, an inference may be drawn. Be 
that as it may, we need not render a finding on this aspect and 
we are not inclined to disturb the factual finding of the High Court. 
For, even if the conclusion of the High Court, that the joint trial 
was conducted in violation of Section 223 Cr.P.C., is accepted, 
the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 would still have to further show that 
the joint trial had caused prejudice to them and had occasioned 
a failure of justice. Mere irregular conduct of a joint or separate 
trial does not vitiate the trial as a whole and the proof of failure of 
justice is sine qua non for holding the trial as invalid. 
32.	 The legal position on Section 223 could not be termed as res integra, 
especially in light of the pronouncement in Nasib Singh v. State 
of Punjab and another7, also relied upon by the High Court. The 
relevant extract of the decision reads thus:
“51. From the decisions of this Court on joint trial and 
separate trials, the following principles can be formulated:
51.1 Section 218 provides that separate trials shall be 
conducted for distinct offences alleged to be committed 
6	
AIR 1963 SC 1850
7	
2021 INSC 642
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
279
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
by a person. Sections 219 - 221 provide exceptions to this 
general rule. If a person falls under these exceptions, then 
a joint trial for the offences which a person is charged with 
may be conducted. Similarly, under Section 223, a joint trial 
may be held for persons charged with different offences 
if any of the clauses in the provision are separately or on 
a combination satisfied;
51.2 While applying the principles enunciated in Sections 
218 - 223 on conducting joint and separate trials, the trial 
court should apply a two-pronged test, namely, (i) whether 
conducting a joint/separate trial will prejudice the defence 
of the accused; and/or (ii) whether conducting a joint/
separate trial would cause judicial delay.
51.3 The possibility of conducting a joint trial will have to 
be determined at the beginning of the trial and not after 
the trial based on the result of the trial. The Appellate 
Court may determine the validity of the argument that 
there ought to have been a separate/joint trial only based 
on whether the trial had prejudiced the right of accused 
or the prosecutrix;
51.4 Since the provisions which engraft an exception use 
the phrase ‘may’ with reference to conducting a joint trial, 
a separate trial is usually not contrary to law even if a 
joint trial could be conducted, unless proven to cause a 
miscarriage of justice; and
51.5 A conviction or acquittal of the accused cannot 
be set aside on the mere ground that there was a 
possibility of a joint or a separate trial. To set aside 
the order of conviction or acquittal, it must be proved 
that the rights of the parties were prejudiced because 
of the joint or separate trial, as the case may be.”
(emphasis supplied)
33.	 On a reading of the provision as well as the exposition reproduced 
above, it is discernible that when a ground of non-joinder or misjoinder 
of charges/trial is taken before an Appellate Court, the test to be 
applied is whether such non-joinder or misjoinder has resulted into 
280
Supreme Court Reports
a failure or miscarriage of justice and has prejudiced the accused. 
It is not enough for the Appellate Court to merely hold that the Trial 
Court ought to have tried certain persons jointly or separately in the 
facts and circumstances of the case. That is where the High Court 
has clearly fell in error in the present case. 
34.	 In its appellate capacity, the High Court was required to address two 
aspects – first, whether the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 ought to have 
been tried separately and second, whether the misjoinder of trials 
had caused prejudice to the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and resulted 
in failure of justice. We are afraid, the High Court restricted itself to 
the first aspect and did not deal with the second aspect in the manner 
required by law. On the first aspect, as already expressed above, 
we refrain from disturbing the factual finding rendered by the High 
Court that the offences were not committed in the same transaction. 
We feel that both views appear to be possible on that aspect and 
therefore, we do not consider it necessary to disturb the finding. On 
the second aspect, which is more important, the observation of the 
High Court reads thus:
“33. Considering the above provision of the Code, the 
present case of the appellants is nowhere applicable for 
joint trial and learned trial Court has convicted both the 
accused persons through a joint trial. For a joint trial to 
be conducted for two persons committing an offence at 
different place and at different time, the trial Court shall 
mention this on record or an application should be moved 
for conducting a joint trial, and the learned Trial Court 
shall apply a judicial mind while considering the matter, 
and the Judicial Officer while performing the duties shall 
make sure that the procedure prescribed in the Code is 
followed and no prejudice be caused to any person. But, 
in the present case, on perusal of the entire record, no 
such application or mention of conducting joint trial has 
been brought on record. This causes a great prejudice 
on the accused persons as the victim herself states 
in para-30 of her deposition that both the appellants 
raped her at different time at different places and they 
never raped her together …”
(emphasis supplied)
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
281
Sushil Kumar Tiwari v. Hare Ram Sah & Ors.
35.	 It could be seen that the sole basis of the High Court’s reasoning 
in arriving at a finding of prejudice in the impugned decision is that 
a joint trial was not permissible. The finding is unsustainable and in 
fact, there is no finding of actual prejudice or failure of justice as a 
result of the joint trial, as necessitated by law. As noted above, the 
High Court ought to have analyzed the facts of the case to return a 
finding of actual prejudice. Mere non-compliance of the procedure 
contemplated under Section 223 does not ipso facto render the 
trial as invalid, and the same cannot form the basis of returning a 
finding of prejudice and failure of justice. The said conclusion must 
emanate from the facts of the case, after a thorough examination 
of the facts and evidence on record. It is not a case wherein the 
joint trial precluded the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 from presenting a 
valid defence. It is also not a case wherein separate evidence of the 
prosecution witnesses could have made any difference to the end 
result. There is no explanation as to how separate trials could have 
made any difference to the outcome of the case, except causing 
harassment to the victim by compelling her to face her offenders 
twice in the witness box for explaining the same version. Thus, we 
are of the considered view that the joint trial of the Respondent Nos. 
1 and 2 did not cause any prejudice to them and no case for failure 
of justice, on account of the said irregularity, appears to be made out. 
36.	 Before closing, we deem it fit to observe that noticeably, the principle 
of beyond reasonable doubt has been misunderstood to mean any 
and every doubt in the case of the prosecution. Often, we come 
across cases wherein loose acquittals are recorded on the basis of 
minor inconsistencies, contradictions and deficiencies, by elevating 
them to the standard of reasonable doubts. A reasonable doubt 
is one that renders the version of the prosecution as improbable, 
and leads the Court to believe in the existence and probability of 
an alternate version of the facts. It is a serious doubt which must 
be backed by reason. The underlying foundation of the principle of 
beyond reasonable doubt is that no innocent should face punishment 
for a crime that he has not done. But a flipside of the same, of 
which we are conscious, is that at times, owing to a mis-application 
of this principle, actual culprits manage to find their way out of the 
clutches of law. Such misapplication of this principle, resulting into 
culprits walking free by taking benefit of doubt, is equally dangerous 
for the society. Every instance of acquittal of an actual culprit revolt 
282
Supreme Court Reports
against the sense of security of the society and acts as a blot on 
the criminal justice system. Therefore, not only should no innocent 
face punishment for something that he has not done, but equally, 
no culprit should manage an acquittal on the basis of unreasonable 
doubts and misapplication of procedure. 
37.	 In the present case, a fairly consistent and creditworthy case of the 
prosecution has been discarded on what could only be termed as 
misapplication of procedure. It takes us back to the first principle 
that procedure is not supposed to control justice. 
38.	 In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the considered view that 
the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside being unsustainable. 
The view taken by the Trial Court was correct and we find no infirmity 
in the same. The judgment of the Trial Court stands restored, both 
on conviction and sentence. 
39.	 The Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 shall surrender before the trial court 
within a period of two weeks from today. In case the Respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 do not surrender within the stipulated time, the trial 
court shall take appropriate recourse to take them into custody for 
serving the remaining part of sentence. Registry is directed to suitably 
communicate this judgment to ensure due compliance.
40.	 The captioned appeal stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms. 
Interim application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan