[2025] 4 S.C.R. 197 : 2025 INSC 351
Siddharth Dalmia & Anr. 
v. 
Union of India & Ors.
(Writ Petition (C) No. 337 of 2018 )
04 March 2025
[Surya Kant* and Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
In the instant Writ petition, purportedly filed in Public Interest, the 
Petitioner sought a direction to the private hospitals not to compel 
the patients to buy the medicines, etc. from the pharmacies 
recommended by them. The issues were (i) whether the affairs of 
the private hospitals, nursing homes, medical institutes, etc. with 
reference to the fixation of prices of drugs, equipment, or other 
accessories sold from the pharmacies run by them and/or with 
whom they have some commercial agreement, can be regulated 
through administrative or legislative measures? (ii) If so, what can 
be the extent of such measures? and (iii) What is the mechanism to 
enforce such measures and to whom such task can be entrusted.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Part IV; Seventh Schedule, List II – 
Problem of unreasonable charges and exploitation of patients 
in private hospitals – Not advisable for the Court to issue 
mandatory directions – Necessity to sensitize the State 
Governments – Direction to all the State Governments to take 
appropriate policy decisions:
Held: The States have committed themselves to provide medical 
facilities to the people in furtherance of the duty and vision 
enshrined in Part IV of the Constitution – However, in proportion 
to the population of this country, the States have not been able to 
develop the requisite medical infrastructure to cater to the needs 
of all kinds of patients – The States have, therefore, facilitated 
and promoted private entities to come forward in the medical 
field – Not only the people, even the States look towards these 
private entities to provide basic and specialized medical facilities 
to the public at large – The subject of public health and sanitation, 
* Author
198
Supreme Court Reports
hospitals, and dispensaries falls under List-II-the State List – It 
may not be advisable for this Court to issue mandatory directions 
which may hamper the growth of hospitals in the private sector; 
but parallelly, it is necessary to sensitize the State Governments re: 
the problem of unreasonable charges and exploitation of patients 
in private hospitals – Consequently, this Writ Petition is disposed 
of with a direction to all the State Governments to consider this 
issue and take appropriate policy decisions as they may deem fit. 
[Paras 13, 16 and 17]
Constitution of India – Art. 21 – Right to life – Provision of 
medical facilities to one and all is an essential component of 
the right. [Para 13]
Case Law Cited
State of Punjab v. Ram Lubhaya Bagga [1998] 1 SCR 1120 : 
(1998) 4 SCC 117; Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samity v. State 
of W.B. [1996] Supp. 2 SCR 331 : (1996) 4 SCC 37; Vincent 
Panikurlangara v. Union of India [1987] 2 SCR 468 : (1987) 2 
SCC 165; In Re : Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 1955 [2024] 
10 SCR 961: 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2880; Suman Kumar v. Union 
of India, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1750; Transport & Dock Workers 
Union v. Mumbai Port Trust [2010] 14 SCR 873 : (2011) 2 SCC 
575; and Govt. of A.P. v. N. Subbarayudu [2008] 5 SCR 522 : 
(2008) 14 SCC 702 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Public Interest; Private hospitals; Unreasonable charges and 
exploitation of patients in private hospitals; Mandatory directions; 
Sensitize the State Government; Policy decisions; Public health 
and sanitation, hospitals, and dispensaries; State List; Right to 
life; Medical facilities.
Case Arising From
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Civil) No.  
337 of 2018
(Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
199
Siddharth Dalmia & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Respondents:
Mohd Irshad, A.A.G., Lenin Singh Hijam, Adv. Gen./Sr. Adv., Anup 
Kumar Rattan, Advocate General, Sudarshan Lamba, Shailesh 
Madiyal, Devashish Bharukha, Vikrant Yadav, Akshay Amritanshu, 
Guntur Pramod Kumar, Ms. Prerna Singh, Dhruv Yadav, Ms. G. 
Indira, Abhimanyu Tewari, Ms. Eliza Bar, Samir Ali Khan, Pranjal 
Sharma, Anil Verma, Abhimanyu Jahmba, Varun Chugh, Krishna 
Kant Dubey, Vatsal Joshi, Ms. Indira Bhakar, Ms. Mrinal Elkar 
Mazumdar, Shreekant Neelappa Terdal, Ms. Ankita Sharma, Arjun 
D Singh, Ms. Poonam Dola, M/s. K J John And Co, Ms. Swati 
Ghildiyal, Ms. Neha Singh, Akshay Amritanshu, Ms. Drishti Saraf, 
Ms. Pragya Upadhyay, Ms. Mandakini Singh, Ms. Ashima Mandla, 
G.M. Kawoosa, Pashupathi Nath Razdan, Ms. Pallavi Langar, 
Sujeet Kumar Chaubey, Nishe Rajen Shonker, Mrs. Anu K Joy, Alim 
Anvar, Santhosh K, Anand Dilip Landge, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, 
Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, Pukhrambam Ramesh Kumar, Karun 
Sharma, Ms. Anupama Ngangom, Ms. Rajkumari Divyasana, 
Anando Mukherjee, Shwetank Singh, Ms. K. Enatoli Sema, Amit 
Kumar Singh, Ms. Chubalemla Chang, Prang Newmai, Aravindh S., 
Akshay Gupta, Aadithya Aravindh, Siddhant Sharma, Milind Kumar, 
Sameer Abhyankar, Ms. Ripul Swati Kumari, Krishna Rastogi, 
Aakash Thakur, Ms. Yashika Sharma, Rahul Kumar, Sabarish 
Subramanian, Vishnu Unnikrishnan, Danish Saifi, Sravan Kumar 
Karanam, Aniket Singh, P. Geetanjali, Shuvodeep Roy, Saurabh 
Tripathi, Deepayan Dutta, Ankit Goel, Vikas Bansal, Harshit Singhal, 
Ms. Vanshaja Shukla, Ms. Anubha Dhulia, Siddhant Yadav, Avijit 
Mani Tripathi, T.K. Nayak, Marbiang Khongwir
Petitioner-in-person.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Surya Kant, J.
1.	
The instant Writ Petition, under Article 32 of the Constitution, has been 
filed purportedly in public interest. The petitioners seek to restrain 
private hospitals from compelling the patients to purchase medicines/
devices/implants/consumables from the hospital pharmacies only, 
where they allegedly charge exorbitant rates, as compared to the 
notified market prices of those items.
200
Supreme Court Reports
2.	
The aforesaid relief has been sought in the backdrop of an unfortunate 
personal experience. The mother of petitioner No.1, who was the wife 
of petitioner No. 2, was diagnosed with breast cancer in July 2017. 
She underwent surgery, followed by six chemotherapies, 20 sessions 
of radio therapy, and 17 adjuvant chemotherapies. This course of 
treatment was continuing when the instant petition was filed in 2018. 
During the hearing, we were informed that, Smt. Neelam Dalmia, 
the patient recovered and fortunately, her condition has improved. 
3.	
The petitioners claim to have realized during her treatment that 
there is an organized system adopted by the private hospitals, 
nursing homes, health care institutions, etc. to fleece patients by 
compelling them and their attendants to buy medicines only from 
the pharmacies run by such hospitals or with whom they have some 
form of collaboration. It is claimed that the medicines/treatments etc. 
are sold by these pharmacies at highly inflated artificial prices, as 
compared to the MRP notified by the Competent Authority.
4.	
The petitioners have further alleged that the Union of India and the 
States have failed to take regulatory and correctional measures as 
a result of which, the patients are being exploited throughout the 
country. 
5.	
Moreover, it is the case of the petitioners that the private hospitals do 
not disclose the prices/MRP of medicines, medical devices/implants, 
consumables, etc. to their patients, and in the absence of any price 
controlling or monitoring of the consumables which do not fall within 
the definition of “drugs”, under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, 
the private hospitals, nursing homes, etc. take undue advantage of 
the fact that the patients or their attendants do not have much option 
but to purchase the items/medicines at inflated prices. 
6.	
The petitioners, accordingly, seek a direction to the private hospitals 
not to compel the patients to buy the medicines, etc. from the 
pharmacies recommended by them. They further seek a direction 
that the Union of India or the State Governments should formulate 
a policy to prevent this form of exploitation, which, if allowed 
to continue, would amount to the deprivation of their right to a 
healthy life guaranteed within the framework of Article 21 of the 
Constitution. It is the petitioners’ case that the States are obligated, 
in terms of Articles 38, 39 and 47 of our Constitution, where the 
Directive Principles of State Policy expect them to come forward 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
201
Siddharth Dalmia & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.
and introduce such regulatory measures as may be required to 
control this menace.
7.	
On 14.05.2018, notice was issued in the petition, and in response 
thereto, counter affidavits have been filed by the States/Union 
Territories of Chandigarh, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Manipur, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Tamil 
Nadu, Kerala, Uttarakhand, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Nagaland, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, and Gujarat.
8.	
The Union of India, through the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
has also filed a separate counter affidavit, inter alia, pointing out 
that the National Council for Clinical Establishments has issued 
minimum standards for the hospitals, including for pharmaceutical 
services, as per which, the availability of drugs, consumables, and 
medical services are ensured in hospitals. The Union of India has 
further taken a stand that there is no compulsion for the patients or 
their attendants to buy medicines from the hospital’s own pharmacy. 
9.	
The States and Union Territories, while questioning the locus of the 
petitioners have, inter alia, pointed out that Jan Aushadhi Kendras and 
Amrit Drug Stores have been set up in Government hospitals, which 
are being run by public sector undertakings, where all medicines are 
provided at subsidized rates. They rely upon the Drug Price Control 
Order, 2013, issued by the Central Government under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 whereunder the prices of the essential drugs 
are fixed to ensure their availability at a reasonable rate. Like the 
Union of India, most of the States have also referred to the National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), under the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers, which, according to them, has the mandate 
to fix/revise the prices of controlled bulk drugs and formulations to 
enforce prices and availability of the medicines in the country. 
10.	 We may hasten to add that most of the States have also highlighted 
State-run-schemes, which are meant to ensure the availability of 
drugs, consumables, and medical services to the patients and 
their attendants at affordable prices. Some States have introduced 
cashless treatment schemes, especially to provide medical facilities 
to specially-abled persons, widows, and BPL card-holders. 
11.	 We have heard learned counsel for the petitioners as well the counsels 
for the Union of India and other States. 
202
Supreme Court Reports
12.	 The issues that fall for consideration are: (i) whether the affairs of 
the private hospitals, nursing homes, medical institutes, etc. with 
reference to the fixation of prices of drugs, equipment, or other 
accessories sold from the pharmacies run by them and/or with 
whom they have some commercial agreement, can be regulated 
through administrative or legislative measures? (ii) If so, what can 
be the extent of such measures? and (iii) What is the mechanism to 
enforce such measures and to whom such task can be entrusted?
13.	 There can be no doubt that the provision of medical facilities to one 
and all is an essential component of the right to life guaranteed 
under Article 21 of the Constitution.1 The States have, therefore, 
committed themselves to provide medical facilities to the people 
in furtherance of the duty and vision enshrined in Part IV of the 
Constitution. It is also a matter of record that in proportion to the 
population of this country, the States have not been able to develop 
the requisite medical infrastructure to cater to the needs of all kinds 
of patients. The States have, therefore, facilitated and promoted 
private entities to come forward in the medical field as a result of 
which, numerous renowned private hospitals, well-known for their 
specialties, and which are comparable to any other hospital around 
the globe, have been set up throughout the country. It, therefore, 
must be acknowledged that not only the people, even the States 
look towards these private entities to provide basic and specialized 
medical facilities to the public at large. 
14.	 In this backdrop, would it be prudent for the Union of India or the 
States to introduce a policy which regulates each and every activity 
within the compound of these private hospitals? Will such a policy 
discourage persons to come forward and invest in the health industry 
throughout the country? Most importantly, why should the States not 
adopt such economic policies whereunder they ensure dedicated 
apportionments towards the development of basic infrastructure, 
including institutions for health services; and till such time the 
States are able to do so, whether stringent measures which would 
stall private entities from coming forward, should be allowed to be 
introduced?
1	
State of Punjab v. Ram Lubhaya Bagga (1998) 4 SCC 117; Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samity v. 
State of W.B. (1996) 4 SCC 37; Vincent Panikurlangara v. Union of India (1987) 2 SCC 165.
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
203
Siddharth Dalmia & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.
15.	 All these issues are undoubtedly of paramount public importance. 
It, however, seems to us that such issues primarily involve policy 
decisions, for which the policy-makers are the best equipped to take 
a holistic view and formulate the guidelines as may be required,2 
to safeguard the patients or their attendants from exploitation while 
simultaneously, ensuring that there is no discouragement and 
unreasonable restriction on private entities from entering the health 
sector.
16.	 It may be noticed that the subject of public health and sanitation, 
hospitals, and dispensaries falls under List-II – the State List – and, 
therefore, any such measure, as illustrated above, must be taken 
by the State Governments, keeping their local conditions in mind. 
17.	 To sum up, it may not be advisable for this Court to issue mandatory 
directions which may hamper the growth of hospitals in the private 
sector; but parallelly, it is necessary to sensitize the State Governments 
re: the problem of unreasonable charges and exploitation of patients 
in private hospitals.
18.	 Consequently, we dispose of this Writ Petition with a direction to all 
the State Governments to consider this issue and take appropriate 
policy decisions as they may deem fit. 
19.	 It is clarified that we have not expressed any opinion on the merits 
of the case. We have only briefly explained the plight of the public at 
large, who comprise a huge class of consumers of health services, 
alongwith the constitutional framework within which such policy 
decisions are required to be taken to redress their grievances. 
20.	 As a result, the pending interlocutory applications, if any, also stand 
disposed of.
Result of the case: Writ Petition disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Bibhuti Bhushan Bose
2	
In Re : Section 6A of the Citizenship Act 1955, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2880; Suman Kumar v. Union of 
India, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1750; Transport & Dock Workers Union v. Mumbai Port Trust, (2011) 2 SCC 
575; Govt. of A.P. v. N. Subbarayudu, (2008) 14 SCC 702.