[2025] 5 S.C.R. 169 : 2025 INSC 511
The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. 
v. 
Gopu & Anr.
(Civil Appeal No. 5300 of 2025) 
08 April 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia and K. Vinod Chandran, JJ.] 
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to the correctness of the order passed by the High 
Court enhancing the compensation awarded to the claimants under 
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
Headnotes†
Limitation Act, 1963 – ss.5, 6 – Legal Disability – Death of wife 
in motor vehicle accident – Claim petition by the husband 
and two minor children – Tribunal awarded compensation – 
Thereagainst, after 10 years, children alone preferred appeal 
before High Court, wherein one child had attained majority five 
years back – High Court enhanced compensation – Correctness:
Held: Appeal filed before the High Court was grossly delayed and 
hence not maintainable – s.6 enables a person disabled, by reason 
of minority, etc., to institute a suit or make an application for the 
execution of a ‘decree’, within the period of limitation provided, after 
the disability has ceased – Provision applies only with respect to a 
suit or an application for the execution of a decree and not in an 
appeal or any other proceeding – Impliedly, the exemption by reason 
of a disability applies to the institution of an original proceeding or 
an application for execution of a final decree, which will not apply 
in the case of an appeal – Father as the natural guardian has 
instituted the original proceeding before the tribunal, with both the 
minor children in the party array of claimants, represented by the 
father, the natural guardian – Father who is the natural guardian 
took a conscious decision not to file an appeal and was satisfied 
with the award – Intention of the legislature being very clear, it is 
not for the courts to extend the period of limitation on misplaced 
sympathies – Even s.5 has no application in the facts of the case, 
insofar as the long delay occasioned, especially when in the original 
proceedings, the children were represented by the father, the 
natural guardian – Judgment of the Single Judge of the High Court 
set aside – Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 – s.166. [Paras 9, 12, 13]
170
Supreme Court Reports
Case Law Cited
Ajay Gupta v. Raju [2016] 3 SCR 225 : (2016) 14 SCC 314; 
Bechi v. Ahsan-Ullah Khan, 1890 SCC OnLine All 1; Musthafali 
v. Subair, 1991 SCC OnLine Ker 269; H.H. Maharana Sahib Shri 
Bhagwat Singh Bahadur of Udaipur v. State of Rajasthan, 1963 
SCC OnLine SC 119 – referred to. 
List of Acts
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; Limitation Act, 1963; Limitation Act of 
1871; Limitation Act of 1908; Limitation Act (XV of 1877).
List of Keywords
Compensation; Motor Accident; Claim petition; Enhancement of 
claim; Limitation to file appeal; Natural guardian; Exemption by reason 
of a disability; Delay; Natural guardian; Intention of the legislature.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 5300 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 01.03.2019 of the High Court 
of Kerala at Ernakulam in MACA No. 627 of 2016
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Sanjay Kumar Dubey, Ms. Shuchi Singh, Shuchi Singh, Vivek 
Kumar Pandey, Ms. Shivani Mishra.
Adv. for the Respondents:
Venkita Subramoniam T.R.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal is directed against an order dated 01.03.2019, passed 
by the High Court of Kerala in MACA No.627 of 2016, by which the 
compensation awarded to the claimants by the Motor Accidents 
Claims Tribunal, Alappuzha (for short, `the Tribunal’) was enhanced.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
171
The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Gopu & Anr.
3.	
On 02.06.2000 at 3.00 P.M., the deceased was riding pillion on a 
motorcycle being driven by one V.G. Shibu, 1st respondent before 
the Tribunal. Near the Avalookunnu Post office, respondent No.1 
applied sudden brake to save a cyclist and the deceased fell and 
was injured. Ultimately, the deceased succumbed to her injuries on 
07.06.2000 at the Medical College Hospital. It is alleged that the 
accident was due to the rash and negligent driving by the bike driver. 
The owner and driver were ex-parte in the Tribunal.
4.	
The legal representatives of the deceased, husband and two 
minor children, preferred a claim petition under Section 166 of the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal 
awarded compensation of Rs.6,53,000/- (Rupees Six Lakh Fifty 
Three Thousand only). Against the award dated 23.11.2006, after 10 
years, in 2016, the children alone preferred an appeal before the High 
Court. The High Court of Kerala enhanced the compensation from 
Rs.6,53,000/- to Rs.14,95,000/- and further directed the appellant-
Insurance Company to pay interest @ 7% p.a. interest. This is the 
order which has been challenged before us.
5.	
Heard learned counsel for the parties and carefully perused the 
material placed on record.
6.	
Learned counsel for the respondent-claimants submits the deceased 
was working as a Junior Public Health Nurse at PHC, Thenipalam and 
was getting an amount of Rs.5,955/- per month. The appellants Gopu 
and Goukul are her children, who were minors, when the deceased 
aged 32 died as a result of the accident. Learned counsel submits 
that just amount was not awarded by the Tribunal; as after the death 
of Rasimol (the deceased), three Pay Commission Reports dated 
25.03.2006, 26.02.2011 and 20.01.2016 were implemented. And a 
considerable increase in the salary was recommended in the Pay 
Commission. Learned counsel contends that the future prospects 
and the hike in salary was not considered by the Tribunal while 
awarding compensation.
7.	
Per contra, learned counsel for the appellant-Insurance Company 
submits that there are discrepancies in the judgment of the High 
Court in apportioning the enhanced compensation and that the cause 
of action had occurred in the year 2000, hence the salary received 
at the time of accident alone can be considered. Learned counsel 
further submits that the judgment passed by the High Court is not 
172
Supreme Court Reports
sustainable in the eye of law as respondent No.1-Gopu himself 
attained majority in the year 2011 as per his affidavit filed with the 
MAC appeal in year 2016 and he has not given any satisfactory 
explanation as to why the MAC Appeal was not filed immediately 
thereafter; when he attained majority. The respondents/claimants 
have filed the MAC appeal after 10 years of the award and further 
after about 8 years (2877 days) from the date of attaining majority.
8.	
Learned counsel for the respondents rely upon Sections 6 and 7 of 
the Limitation Act, 1963, which read as under:
“6. Legal disability.—(1) Where a person entitled to institute 
a suit or make an application for the execution of a decree 
is, at the time from which the prescribed period is to be 
reckoned, a minor or insane, or an idiot, he may institute 
the suit or make the application within the same period 
after the disability has ceased, as would otherwise have 
been allowed from the time specified therefor in the third 
column of the Schedule.
(2) Where such person is, at the time from which the 
prescribed period is to be reckoned, affected by two such 
disabilities, or where, before his disability has ceased, he 
is affected by another disability, he may institute the suit 
or make the application within the same period after both 
disabilities have ceased, as would otherwise have been 
allowed from the time so specified.
(3) Where the disability continues up to the death of that 
person, his legal representative may institute the suit or 
make the application within the same period after the 
death, as would otherwise have been allowed from the 
time so specified.
(4) Where the legal representative referred to in sub-
section (3) is, at the date of the death of the person whom 
he represents, affected by any such disability, the rules 
contained sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply.
(5) Where a person under disability dies after the disability 
ceases but within the period allowed to him under this 
section, his legal representative may institute the suit 
or make the application within the same period after the 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
173
The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Gopu & Anr.
death, as would otherwise have been available to that 
person had he not died.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, ‘minor’ 
includes a child in the womb.
7. Disability of one of several persons.—Where one of 
several persons jointly entitled to institute a suit or make 
an application for the execution of a decree is under any 
such disability, and a discharge can be given without the 
concurrence of such person, time will run against them 
all; but, where no such discharge can be given, time will 
not run as against any of them until one of them becomes 
capable of giving such discharge without the concurrence 
of the others or until the disability has ceased.
Explanation I.—This section applies to a discharge from 
every kind of liability, including a liability in respect of any 
immovable property.
Explanation II. —For the purposes of this section, the 
Manager of a Hindu undivided family governed by the 
Mitakshara law shall be deemed to be capable of giving a 
discharge without the concurrence of the other members 
of the family only if he is in management of the joint family 
property”
9.	
Section 6, of the Limitation Act, 1963, as is evident from the extract 
enables a person disabled, by reason of minority, insanity or idiocy, 
to institute a suit or make an application for the execution of a 
‘decree’, within the period of limitation provided, after the disability 
has ceased. The provision applies only with respect to a suit or an 
application for the execution of a decree and not in an appeal or 
any other proceeding. Here, we must notice the definition clause, 
Section 2(l) which though does not define a suit but provides that 
‘a suit does not include an appeal or an application’. An appeal, an 
application and a suit are hence dealt with differently insofar as the 
Limitation Act is concerned, as evidenced from Section 3 also. In this 
context, we have also to notice the distinction, insofar as Section 5 
of the Limitation Act, providing for admission of an appeal, or any 
application, other than an application under any of the provisions of 
Order XXI of the C.P.C., even after the prescribed period, if sufficient 
cause is shown to satisfy the Court. 
174
Supreme Court Reports
10.	 It is pertinent that till the Act of 1963 came into effect applications 
for execution of the decree were not specifically excluded from the 
purview of the provision allowing condonation of delay, (Section 5(b) 
of the Limitation Act of 1871 and Section 5 of the Limitation Act of 
1908) which was excluded for the first time under Section 5 of the 
Act of 1963. It has been held that Section 5 of the Limitation Act does 
not apply to a suit in Ajay Gupta v. Raju.1 Likewise legal disabilities 
specified in Section 6 creates an exemption and enables the period of 
limitation to run from the date on which the disability has ceased, only 
in the case of a suit or an application for the execution of a decree; 
the last of which we already noticed is excluded under Section 5. 
11.	 In this context, we refer to the decision of the Full Bench of the 
High Court of Allahabad in Bechi v. Ahsan-Ullah Khan2 [ILR (1890) 
12 All 461 (FB)] and make the following extract from Mahmood, J’s 
opinion which was concurred by all the other three Hon’ble Judges:
“What effect the minority of some of the defendants has 
upon the case is the subject of the second question 
as enunciated by me. And upon this point, I am of the 
opinion that the defendants-respondents have no case. 
It is true that some of them are minors, but they are duly 
represented by guardians whose interests are the same 
as theirs, and the fact of minority could not prevent the 
guardians from showing due diligence on behalf of the 
minors. It is noticeable that Section 7 of the Limitation 
Act, in extending the period of limitation on account of 
minority, refers only to suits and applications and makes 
no mention of appeals, and its provisions are, therefore, 
unavailable to the minor defendants.”
Section 7 referred to in the above extract is from the: Limitation 
Act (XV of 1877) and the provisions we are concerned with also is 
similarly worded, without any mention of appeals. 
12.	 In Musthafali v. Subair,3 the High Court of Kerala considering the 
word ‘suit’ used in Section 6 and defined in the Limitation Act held 
1	
(2016) 14 SCC 314
2	
1890 SCC OnLine All 1
3	
1991 SCC OnLine Ker 269
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
175
The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Gopu & Anr.
that the proceedings under Section 110A of the Motor Vehicles Act 
are in the nature of a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure; since 
the lis is instituted by presentation of an application, which is more 
or less like a plaint. The Division Bench of the High Court relied on a 
Constitution Bench decision of this Court in H.H. Maharana Sahib Shri 
Bhagwat Singh Bahadur of Udaipur v. State of Rajasthan 4 which held 
“A proceeding which does not commence with a plaint or 
petition in the nature of plaint, or where the claimant is 
not in respect of dispute ordinarily triable in a civil court, 
would prima facie not be regarded as falling within Section 
86 of Code of Civil Procedure..” [sic paragraph 5]. 
Impliedly, the exemption by reason of a disability applies to the 
institution of an original proceeding or an application for execution 
of a final decree, which will not apply in the case of an appeal. 
Appeal is a continuation of the original proceeding and if, as is the 
case here, when the original proceeding was instituted at the time 
of minority, why should there be a subsequent disability inferred, 
when the natural guardian, the father, who instituted the appeal was 
alive and did not suffer from any disability himself, even when the 
appeal period stood expired. The above observation of ours may 
not be taken as Section 6 being applicable to appeals, which the 
legislature did not intend.
13.	 In the present case, the father as the natural guardian has instituted 
the original proceeding before the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, 
filed for compensation on the death of his wife in a motor vehicle 
accident, with both the minor children in the party array of claimants, 
represented by the father, the natural guardian. The father did not 
choose to file an appeal from the award. In fact, as per Annexure 
P-4, it is seen that the Insurance Company had filed an appeal from 
the award of the Tribunal on the ground of the policy not covering 
the risk of a pillion rider, which stood dismissed by a Division Bench 
of the High Court, based on a clarification issued by the Insurance 
Regulatory Development Authority that a package policy will also 
cover the risk of a pillion rider. In the said appeal the father and the 
two minor children were made parties, and they appeared through 
4	
1963 SCC OnLine SC 119
176
Supreme Court Reports
counsel. The father did not choose to file a cross appeal seeking 
enhancement of the claim amounts. The father who is the natural 
guardian took a conscious decision not to file an appeal and was 
satisfied with the award. The statements made in the application for 
condonation of delay, that; the father had married again; the children 
were abandoned; who were in the care of their grandparents are 
not substantiated. We make this observation fully conscious of the 
fact that any substantiation would also have not enabled the filing 
of an appeal under Section 6, the exemption under which, based 
on a disability, is confined to suits and applications for execution 
of a decree. The intention of the legislature being very clear, it is 
not for the courts to extend the period of limitation on misplaced 
sympathies. Even Section 5 has no application in the facts of the 
case, insofar as the long delay occasioned, especially when in the 
original proceedings, the children were represented by the father, 
the natural guardian.
14.	  On the above reasoning, we set aside the judgment of the learned 
Single Judge finding the appeal filed to be grossly delayed and hence 
not maintainable. The appeal stands allowed. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain