[2025] 9 S.C.R. 283 : 2025 INSC 1067
Kiran 
v. 
Rajkumar Jivraj Jain & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 3867 of 2025)
01 September 2025
[B.R. Gavai, CJI, K. Vinod Chandran and N.V. Anjaria,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court was correct in allowing the pre-arrest 
bail to respondent-accused u/s.438 Cr.PC in respect of alleged 
commission of offenses punishable u/ss.118(1), 115(1), 189(2), 
189(4), 190, 191(2), 191(3), 333, 324(4), 76, 351(3) and 352 
of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and u/ss.3(1)(o), 3(1)(r),  
3(1)(s), 3(1)(w)(i) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.438 – Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 – ss.118 (1), 115(1), 189(2), 189(4), 190, 191(2), 
191(3), 333, 324(4), 76, 351(3), 352 – Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 –  
ss.3(1)(o), 3(1)(r), 3(1)(s), 3(1)(w)(i), 18 – Allegation that the 
accused persons beat the complainant with iron rod and 
threatened to burn the house – The word “Mangatyano” 
was used with a clear intention to humiliate the complainant 
because he belonged to the said Scheduled Caste community – 
The mother and aunt of the appellant-complainant were also 
meted out similar treatment – FIR registered – Respondent-
accused sought anticipatory bail, which was rejected by the 
trial Court – However, the High Court granted anticipatory 
bail – Correctness:
Held: 1. The High Court in proceeding to evaluate the testimony 
of witnesses and to opine on that basis that there were certain 
discrepancies, no offence was made out, committed a manifest 
error  – The anticipatory bail granted by overlooking of and 
disregarding the bar of s.18 of the 1989 Act was a clear illegality 
* Author
284
Supreme Court Reports
and jurisdictional error committed by the High Court – The order of 
the High Court could not be sustained in the eye of law. [Para 9]
2. The provision of s.18 of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled 
Tribes, Act, 1989 with express language excludes the applicability 
of s.438, Cr.PC, it creates a bar against grant of anticipatory 
bail in absolute terms in relations to the arrest of a person who 
faces specific accusations of having committed the offence under 
the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Act – The benefit of 
anticipatory bail for such an accused is taken off – The absolute 
nature of bar, however, could be read and has to be applied with a 
rider – Where on the face of it the offence u/s.3 of the Act is found 
to have not been made out and that the accusations relating to the 
commission of such offence are devoid of prima facie merits, the 
Court has a room to exercise the discretion to grant anticipatory 
bail to the accused u/s.438 of the Code – In the instant case, the 
said abusive utterances and conduct by the accused, the caste 
nexus was established – The complainant was humiliated with 
casteist and abusive approach for the reason that he did not vote 
in favour of particular candidate one accused no.8 in the Assembly 
Election as desired by the respondent-accused – In the present 
case, the incident took place outside the house of the appellant 
which could be viewed by anybody – It was indeed a place within 
public view – There is no gainsaying that in the facts of the case 
all ingredients necessary to prima facie constitute offences u/s.3 
of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Act, 1989 as alleged 
in the FIR stood satisfied. [Paras 6, 6.1, 7.1, 8]
Case Law Cited
State of M.P. & Anr. v. Ram Krishna Balothia & Anr. [1995] 1 SCR 897 
: (1995) 3 SCC 221; Vilas Pandurang Pawar v. State of Maharashtra 
[2012] 8 SCR 270 : (2012) 8 SCC 795; Prathvi Raj Chauhan v. 
Union of India [2020] 2 SCR 727 : (2020) 4 SCC 727 – relied on.
Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab [1994] 2 SCR 375 : (1994) 3 SCC 
569; Hitesh Verma v. State of Uttarakhand [2020] 9 SCR 593 : 
(2020) 10 SCC 710; Ramesh Chandra Vaish v. State of U.P. [2023] 
6 SCR 643 : 2023 SCC OnLine SC 668; Shajan Skaria v. The 
State of Kerala & Anr. [2024] 8 SCR 1086 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 
2249; Karuppudayar v. State Rep. by the Deputy Superintendent 
of Police, Lalguid Trichy & Ors. [2025] 1 SCR 1381: 2025 SCC 
OnLine SC 2015; Swaran Singh & Ors. v. State through Standing 
Counsel & Anr. [2008] 12 SCR 132 – referred to.
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
285
Kiran v. Rajkumar Jivraj Jain & Anr.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) 
Act, 1989.
List of Keywords
Anticipatory Bail; Section 18 of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled 
Tribes, Act, 1989; Applicability of Section 438 CrPC; Prima facie 
merits; “Mang” or “Matang”; Abusive casteist utterance; Outside 
the house; Place within public view.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
3867 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 29.04.2025 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay at Aurangabad in CRLA No. 201 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Amol Nirmalkumar Suryawanshi, Ms. Srishty Pandey, B Dhananjay, 
M/S. Juristrust Law Offices.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Dilip Annasaheb Taur, Amol V Deshmukh, Ms. Ira Mahajan, 
Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, Shrirang  
B. Varma.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
N.V. Anjaria, J.
Leave granted. 
1.1	 With the consent of learned counsels for the parties and upon 
their joint request, the appeal was taken up for final hearing 
today. 
2.	
By way of present appeal, what is called in question is judgment and 
order dated 29.04.2025 of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, 
286
Supreme Court Reports
Bench at Aurangabad, in Criminal Appeal No.201 of 2025, whereby 
the High Court allowed the pre-arrest bail to respondent No.1 under 
Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, which was 
refused by the Additional Sessions Judge, Paranda. 
3.	
FIR No.255/2024 came to be registered by the appellant-complainant 
with the Paranda Police Station, District Dharashiv on 26.11.2024 
against accused-respondent No.1 herein and others in respect of 
alleged commission of offenses punishable under Sections 118 (1), 
115(1), 189(2), 189(4), 190, 191(2), 191(3), 333, 324(4), 76, 351(3) 
and 352 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and under Sections 
3(1)(o), 3(1)(r), 3(1)(s), 3(1)(w)(i) of the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989. 
3.1	 The relevant and material part of the contents of the said FIR 
is extracted below.
“Today on 25.11.2024 at around 11:00 AM, while I and 
my mother Mohini were at home, Bahubali Masalkar, 
a peon from the Gram Panchayat Office, Kapilapuri, 
came in front of my house and started abusing us, 
asking why we did not vote in yesterday’s assembly 
elections as we had asked. At that time, I tried to tell 
him that voting was my only concern, but he abused 
me and then rushed at me. At that time, we got into 
a fight. After that we got into a fight. After that he 
left from there. 
Then at 11:20 in the morning, my village’s known, 
namely Rajkumar Jain, Jaykumar Jain, Bharatesh 
Awani, Jayghosh Jain, Kishore Awani, Vaibhav 
Awani, Nabiraj Awani, Bahubali Masalkar, Jitendra 
Wasgadekar, Anil Wasgadekar, Ranjit Rajkumar Jain, 
Jagdish Jain, all residents of Kapilapuri (all Jains), 
came in front of our house. At that time, Rajkumar 
Jain said to me, “Mangtyano, you have become much 
arrogant”, you are staying in the village and voting 
against me, so he hit me on the head and back with 
an iron rod.” At that time, I fell down. After that, Kishore 
Jain and Vaibhav Awani entered my house, pushed 
my mother Mohini and aunt Rekha, grabbed the 
saree of mother Mohini and pulled it, threatened that 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
287
Kiran v. Rajkumar Jivraj Jain & Anr.
“Mangtyano, you have become arrogant, we will not let 
you stay in the village, we will burn your houses,” beat 
them with an iron rod and even punched them giving 
internal injuries. In it, a one-tola gold mangalsutra from 
mother Mohini’s fortune necklace fell somewhere in the 
scuffle. The household utensils were damaged by the 
rioters, causing total damage to our household items. 
Seeing us being beaten up, my friend Yashwant 
Bodre from the village came to the house to resolve 
the dispute. Rajkurhar Jain also said to him that you 
Ramoshi have also become arrogant, that you voted 
for someone else in yesterday’s assembly elections 
without listening to us; so he beat Yashwant on the 
left hand and back with an iron rod in his hand. At that 
time, some of them had petrol bottle in their hands 
and were shouting and threatening repeatedly that 
they would burn our houses and not let us stay in 
the village. Due to the noise of this commotion, three 
of our villagers, Avinash Masgude, Appa Masgude, 
Omkar Mane, came to the house and rescued us 
from the clutches of these men. After that, when 
approached to the Paranda police station to file a 
complaint, the police immediately gave us a letter 
for medical treatment and sent us to the Paranda 
Sub-District Hospital for medical treatment.
On 25.11,2024 between 11:00 AM to 11.20 AM, the 
names of Rajkumar Jain, Jaykumar Jain, Bharatesh 
Awani, Jayghosh Jain, Kishore Awani, Vaibhav 
Awani, Nabiraj Awani, Bahubali Masalkar, Jitendra 
Wasgadekar, Anil Wasgadekar, Ranjeet Rajkumar 
Jain, Jagdish Jain, all residents of Kapilapuri, angry 
that I voted against them in yesterday’s assembly 
elections, even though they knew that I and my family 
belongs to the Matang community, they abused us in 
caste terms, beat us with an iron rod and injured us, 
and they also entered my house and beat my mother 
and aunt abusing in filthy language, and they pulled 
my mother’s saree and molested her, so I have a 
complaint against them.
288
Supreme Court Reports
I am giving my above statement with full of my 
consciousness and after reading it, I found it 
completely correct as per my narration.”
3.2	 What is narrated in the FIR disclosed certain manifest aspects. 
On 25.11.2024 in the morning, the respondent-accused along 
with others went to the house of the appellant and standing 
outside and in front of appellant’s house stated to the appellant 
“Mangtyano, you have become much arrogant, you are staying 
in the village and voting against me”. The appellant was attacked 
with an iron rod. The mother and aunt of the appellant were 
addressed with the same set of words as above and that they 
all were beaten with the iron rod and were punched inflicting 
internal injuries, the Mangalsutra of the mother fell somewhere 
in the scuffle. The accused had in their hands petrol bottles 
and were repeatedly shouting and threatening that they would 
burn the house of the appellant. The injured appellant lodged 
the FIR from the hospital.
3.3	 The evident reason for this incident was animosity generated in 
the mind of the accused in respect of appellant’s act of not voting 
in favour of particular candidate in the assembly elections which 
had concluded on the previous day. The exhibition of enmity 
by the accused, their utterances as above and the conduct of 
beating the appellant and hurling castiest abuses and threats 
were in public view, outside the house of the appellant. The 
appellant belonged to the Scheduled Caste community whose 
caste was “Mang” or “Matang”; whereas the respondent accused 
was not the member of the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe 
community. He hailed from ‘Jain’ community. 
3.4	 While rejecting the prayer of respondent-accused for anticipatory 
bail, the Additional Sessions Judge, Paranda recorded findings 
in paragraph 8 of his order inter alia that there was a specific 
allegation against the accused and that the accused had 
abused the complainant by referring to his caste, that the 
caste certificate confirmed that the complainant-informant 
belonged to the Scheduled Caste community and further that 
the incident was witnessed by independent witnesses. On the 
basis of statements in the FIR and the material available, the 
court concluded that the ingredients of the offences punishable 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
289
Kiran v. Rajkumar Jivraj Jain & Anr.
under Section 3 of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as 
“the SC/ST Act”) as alleged were made out. 
3.5	 When the order rejecting the anticipatory bail was challenged 
before the High Court by the accused, the High Court took the 
view to record that there were inconsistencies in the prosecution 
story as could be gathered from the account of eye-witnesses. 
According to the High Court, the entire prosecution case 
appeared to be exaggerated and false. What weighed with the 
High Court was also the aspect that the incident took place 
immediately after the declaration of results of the assembly 
elections, therefore, it had political overtures. Resting on such 
considerations, the High Court concluded that the appellant was 
falsely implicated. Further referring to the nature of the injuries 
and allegations, the High Court granted anticipatory bail. 
4.	
Mr. Amol Nirmalkumar Suryawanshi, learned counsel appearing for 
the appellant-herein assailed the judgment and order of the High 
Court to submit that the High Court not only misdirected itself in 
exercise of the discretion to grant bail to respondent No.1, but it 
plainly overlooked the provisions of Section 18 of the SC/ST Act. 
Highlighting the contents of and the allegations in the FIR, it was 
submitted that the accused used abusive language referring to 
caste and the appellant who was the member of the Scheduled 
Caste community was thereby subjected to derogation and insult. 
The appellant was intimidated and his mother and aunt were also 
abused with castiest slur and were threatened. Learned counsel for 
the appellant further submitted that the castiest slur and the castiest 
abuse employed against the appellant clearly made out the offence 
under Section 3 of the SC/ST Act as alleged and since the offence 
was prima facie committed, the pre-arrest bail could not have been 
granted by the High Court in view of the provision of Section 18 of 
the Act. 
4.1	 Learned counsel for the appellant relied on the decision of Vilas 
Pandurang Pawar vs. State of Maharashtra1 to submit that 
at the stage of the consideration of grant of bail or otherwise, 
the High Court was not expected to conduct a mini trial. It 
1	
(2012) 8 SCC 795
290
Supreme Court Reports
was submitted that the reasoning of the High Court was not 
acceptable. Regarding bar created by virtue of Section 18 of the 
SC/ST Act, learned counsel pressed into service the decision 
of this Court in Prathvi Raj Chauhan vs. Union of India2. 
4.2	 On the other hand, learned counsel for respondent No.1 seeking 
to defend the order of the High Court, submitted that Section 
18 of the SC/ST Act did not create an absolute bar to grant 
anticipatory bail. He proceeded to submit that in subsequent 
decision of this Court in Shajan Skaria vs. The State of Kerala 
& Anr.3, it was observed that the court needed to undertake an 
exercise to find out whether there was a prima facie substance 
in the allegations. According to learned counsel for respondent 
No.1, the allegations in the FIR were made for the sake of 
making and were out of anger regarding casting of vote in the 
assembly elections. He tried to submit that it was wrong to give 
a castiest colour to the allegations to conclude that any offence 
under the SC/ST Act was committed by the accused. 
4.3	 The respondent-State of Maharashtra filed the counter affidavit 
and opposed the grant of pre-arrest bail to respondent No.1 
accused by emphasising the operational ambit of Section 18 
of the SC/ST Act. It was highlighted that when prima facie 
material existed in the form of allegations in the FIR and other 
attendant factual aspects, the respondent No.1 could not have 
been granted the anticipatory bail by the High Court. 
5.	
Amongst the offences alleged in the FIR, included those under 
Sections 3(1)(o), 3(1)(r), 3(1)(s) and 3(1)(w)(i) of the SC/ST Act. The 
relevant extract of Section 3 of the SC/ST Act is as under. 
“3. Punishments for offences atrocities.— (1) Whoever, 
not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled 
Tribe,
(b) to (n) … … …
(o) commits any offence under this Act against a member 
of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe for having 
2	
(2020) 4 SCC 727
3	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 2249
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
291
Kiran v. Rajkumar Jivraj Jain & Anr.
voted or not having voted for a particular candidate or for 
having voted in a manner provided by law; 
(p) … … …
(q) … … …
(r) intentionally insults or intimidates with intent to humiliate 
a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe in 
any place within public view; 
(s) abuses any member of a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe by caste name in any place within public 
view; 
(t) … … … 
(u) … … …
(v) … … … 
(w) (i) intentionally touches a woman belonging to a 
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, knowing that 
she belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, 
when such act of touching is of a sexual nature and is 
without the recipient’s consent; (ii) uses words, acts or 
gestures of a sexual nature towards a woman belonging 
to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, knowing that 
she belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe.
5.1	 Section 18 of the SC/ST Act is reproduced: 
“18. Section 438 of the Code not to apply to 
persons committing an offence under the Act.— 
Nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in 
relation to any case involving the arrest of any 
person on an accusation of having committed an 
offence under this Act.”
5.1.1	 Section 18A in its sub section (1) of the Act provides 
that for the registration of an FIR against any person, 
preliminary enquiry shall not be required. It is further 
stated that the investigating officer shall not be required 
to take approval for the arrest, if necessary, of any person 
against whom an accusation about the commission of 
an offence under this SC/ST Act has been made. Sub 
292
Supreme Court Reports
section (2) of Section 18A of the SC/ST Act mentions 
that the provisions of Section 438 of the Cr.PC shall 
not apply to a case under this Act notwithstanding any 
judgment or order or direction of any Court.
5.2	 It is evident from the above provision of Section 18 that it 
expressly excludes the applicability of Section 438 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“hereinafter referred to as “the 
Cr.PC”). In another words, in relation to any case involving 
arrest of a person who is facing the accusation about committing 
offence under this Act, protection of Section 438, Cr.P.C. would 
not be available. The Legislature has taken away the benefit of 
anticipatory bail in respect of the arrest for the offences alleged 
under the SC/ST Act. The bar in Section 18 of the SC/ST Act 
would operate. 
5.3	 While upholding the Constitutional validity of Section 18 of 
the Act, this Court in State of M.P. & Anr. vs. Ram Krishna 
Balothia & Anr.4 observed as under,
“… The offences enumerated under the said Act 
fall into a separate and special class. Article 17 of 
the Constitution expressly deals with abolition of 
‘untouchability’ and forbids its practice in any form. 
It also provides that enforcement of any disability 
arising out of ‘untouchability’ shall be an offence 
punishable in accordance with law. The offences, 
therefore, which are enumerated under Section 3(1) 
arise out of the practice of ‘untouchability’.”
(Para 6)
5.3.1	 The court proceeded to observe, 
“The exclusion of Section 438 CrPC in connection 
with offences under the Act has to be viewed in the 
contest of the prevailing social conditions which give 
rise to such offences, and the apprehension that 
perpetrators of such atrocities are likely to threaten 
and intimidate their victims and prevent or obstruct 
4	
(1995) 3 SCC 221
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
293
Kiran v. Rajkumar Jivraj Jain & Anr.
them in the prosecution of these offenders, if the 
offenders are allowed to avail of anticipatory bail as 
pointed out in the Statement of Objects and Reasons 
of the Act. In these circumstances, if anticipatory 
bail is not made available to persons who commit 
such offences, such a denial cannot be considered 
as unreasonable or violative of Article 14, as these 
offences form a distinct class by themselves and 
cannot be compared with other offences” 
(para 6)
5.4	 The aforesaid bar is held to be not violative of Article 21 of 
the Constitution. In Kartar Singh vs. State of Punjab5 it was 
stated that taking away the right of pre-arrest bail under Section 
438 of the Cr.PC, under Section 18 of the SC/ST Act would not 
infringe the right to personal liberty. 
5.5	 In Vilas Pandurang Pawar vs. State of Maharashtra6, this 
Court explained the bar under Section 18 of the SC/ST Act 
against grant of anticipatory bail in the following words, 
“Section 18 of the SC/ST Act creates a bar for 
invoking Section 438 of the Code. However, a 
duty is cast on the court to verify the averments in 
the complaint and to find out whether an offence 
under Section 3(1) of the SC/ST Act has been 
prima facie made out. In other words, if there is a 
specific averment in the complaint, namely, insult or 
intimidation with intent to humiliate by calling with 
caste name, the accused persons are not entitled 
to anticipatory bail.”
(Para 9)
5.5.1	 It was further stated in Vilas Pandurang Pawar (supra), 
“Moreover, while considering the application for bail, 
scope for appreciation of evidence and other material 
5	
(1994) 3 SCC 569
6	
(2012) 8 SCC 795
294
Supreme Court Reports
on record is limited. The court is not expected 
to indulge in critical analysis of the evidence on 
record. When a provision has been enacted in the 
Special Act to protect the persons who belong to 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
and a bar has been imposed in granting bail under 
Section 438 of the Code, the provision in the Special 
Act cannot be easily brushed aside by elaborate 
discussion on the evidence.”
Para 10)
5.6	 A three judge bench of this Court in Prathvi Raj Chauhan 
(supra) expressed itself thus,
“… exclusion of Section 438 CrPC in connection 
with offences under the Act has to be viewed in 
the context of the prevailing social conditions which 
give rise to such offences, and the apprehension 
that perpetrators of such atrocities are likely to 
threaten and intimidate their victims and prevent or 
obstruct them in the prosecution of these offenders, 
if the offenders are allowed to avail of anticipatory 
bail as pointed out in the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons of the Act.”
(Para 6)
5.6.1	 This Court emphasised in Prithvi Raj Chauhan (supra) 
that anticipatory bail cannot be granted as a matter of 
right. It was stated that bail is essentially a statutory 
right and cannot be said to be an essential ingredient 
of Article 21of the Constitution. It was further observed 
that if anticipatory bail is not made available to persons 
who commit such offences, such a denial cannot be 
considered as unreasonable or violative of Article 14, as 
these offences form a distinct class by themselves and 
cannot be compared with other offences. 
5.7	 The aforesaid provision of Section 18 and the bar created 
thereunder has to be seen in the context of the object and 
purpose with which the Parliament enacted the SC/SC Act, 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
295
Kiran v. Rajkumar Jivraj Jain & Anr.
1989. This legislation was brought into force with an avowed 
object of implementing the measures to improve the socio-
economic conditions of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes, who have remained a vulnerable class in the society. 
The underlying idea is to ensure that the persons belonging 
to these classes are not denied their civil rights, are not 
subjected to indignities and are insulated from humiliation 
and harassment. 
5.7.1	 The provisions of Section 18 in its ultimate analysis, 
furthers the very object of the enactment. Seemingly a 
stricter provision, it underscores the Constitutional idea 
of availing social justice and to ensure the same pedestal 
for the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe community 
people with other classes in the society. 
5.8	 The decision of this Court in Shajan Skaria (supra) sought to 
be pressed into service on behalf of respondent No.1 take no 
different view. In that case, the Bench of two Judges of this 
Court elaborated the law in respect of grant of anticipatory bail, 
then highlighted and recognised the bar created under Section 
18 of the SC/ST Act to observe that only in the cases where 
the offence could not be said to have been made out on a very 
prima facie consideration, the court may exercise the discretion 
to grant pre-arrest bail to the accused. 
5.8.1	 In Shajan Skaria (supra) case the appellant-accused 
who was an Editor of an Online news channel who 
had published a video on YouTube levelling certain 
allegations against the complainant who belonged 
to “Pulaya” community and who was a Member of 
Kerala State Legislative Assembly representing the 
constituency which seat was reserved for the member 
of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe community. 
An attentive reading of the broadcast made on YouTube 
which was a subject matter in that case, would go to 
indicate that there was no reference therein to the 
caste name, which aspect becomes clear from the very 
translation itself, narrated in the judgment by the Court. 
The caste word “Pulaya” was not even referred to in the 
complaint also, what was only stated by complainant 
296
Supreme Court Reports
the subject matter was on Scheduled Caste community. 
In the totality of the circumstances thereby this Court in 
Shajan Skaria (supra) took the view that the contents 
of the YouTube video displayed by the accused were 
not intended to denigrate the complainant as a member 
of the Scheduled Caste and that it could not be said 
to be with castiest slur.
5.9	 In Hitesh Verma vs. State of Uttarakhand & Anr.7 as well 
as in Ramesh Chandra Vaish vs. State of U.P.8 this Court 
stated that intimidation or insult amounts to an offence 
under Section 3(1) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 should have been 
targeted intentionally to the member of the Scheduled Caste or 
Scheduled Tribe community and also because he is member 
of the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe community. In 
Swarn Singh (supra), it was stated that for making out 
the offence under Section 3(1)(r) of the SC/ST Act, 1989, it 
requires that the insult or intimidation should be at a place 
within public view. 
6.	
In light of the parameters in relation to the applicability of Section 18 
of the Act emanating from afore-discussed various decisions of this 
Court, the proposition could be summarised that as the provision 
of Section 18 of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes, Act, 
1989 with express language excludes the applicability of Section 
438, Cr.PC, it creates a bar against grant of anticipatory bail in 
absolute terms in relations to the arrest of a person who faces specific 
accusations of having committed the offence under the Scheduled 
Caste and Scheduled Tribe Act. The benefit of anticipatory bail for 
such an accused is taken off. 
6.1	 The absolute nature of bar, however, could be read and has to 
be applied with a rider. In a given case where on the face of it 
the offence under Section 3 of the Act is found to have not been 
made out and that the accusations relating to the commission 
of such offence are devoid of prima facie merits, the Court has 
7	
(2020) 10 SCC 710
8	
2023 SCC OnLine SC 668
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
297
Kiran v. Rajkumar Jivraj Jain & Anr.
a room to exercise the discretion to grant anticipatory bail to 
the accused under Section 438 of the Code. 
6.2	 Non-making of prima facie case about the commission of offence 
is perceived to be such a situation where the Court can arrive 
at such a conclusion in the first blush itself or by way of the 
first impression upon very reading of the averments in the FIR. 
The contents and the allegations in the FIR would be decisive 
in this regard. Furthermore, in reaching a conclusion as to 
whether a prima facie offence is made out or not, it would not 
be permissible for the Court to travel into the evidentiary realm 
or to consider other materials, nor the Court could advert to 
conduct a mini trial. 
7.	
Reverting to the facts of the present case, the respondent-accused 
was not a member of Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe community. 
The appellant belonged to scheduled caste community known as 
“Mang” or “Matang”. The allegations made in the FIR lodged by the 
complainant was that he was addressed by the accused with abusive 
casteist utterance “Mangatyano, you are became very arrogant, 
you are staying in the village and voting against”. The appellant 
was addressed as above by the accused outside the house of the 
appellant where others were present 
7.1	 The accused persons beat the complainant with iron rod and 
threatened to burn the house. The mother and aunt of the 
appellant-complainant were also meted out similar treatment 
with intimidation and were addressed with same casteist slur. 
The use of the word “Mangatyano” was with a clear intention 
to humiliate the complainant because he belonged to the said 
Scheduled Caste community. In the said abusive utterances and 
conduct by the accused, the caste nexus was established. The 
complainant was humiliated with casteist and abusive approach 
for the reason that he did not vote in favour of particular candidate 
one Bahubali-accused No.8 in the Assembly Election as desired 
by the respondent-accused. 
7.2	 The incident as above took place outside the house of the 
complainant, it was a place within public view. The term 
“any place within public view” was considered by this Court 
in Swarn Singh (supra) and Hitesh Verma (supra) was 
298
Supreme Court Reports
also subsequently referred to in the decision of this Court in 
Karuppudayar vs. State Rep. by the Deputy Superintendent 
of Police, Lalguid Trichy & Ors.9 wherein the Court drew 
distinction between “public place” and “any place within public 
view”. It was held that if the offence is committed outside the 
building, for example in the lawn outside the house, and the 
lawn can be seen by someone from the road or lawn outside 
the boundary wall, then the lawn would certainly be a place 
within the public view. 
8.	
In the present case, as noted above, the incident took place outside 
the house of the appellant which could be viewed by anybody. It was 
indeed a place within public view. There is no gainsaying that in the 
facts of the case all ingredients necessary to prima facie constitute 
offences under Section 3 of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled 
Tribe Act, 1989 as alleged in the FIR stood satisfied. Furthermore, 
the occurrence of incident was fortified by recovery of clothes and 
weapons. 
9.	
In the above view, there is no escape from the conclusion that offence 
under the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of 
Atrocities) Act, 1989 is made out from the bare reading of the FIR. 
The High Court in proceeding to evaluate the testimony of witnesses 
and to opine on that basis that there were certain discrepancies, no 
offence was made out, committed a manifest error. The anticipatory 
bail granted by overlooking of and disregarding the bar of Section 18 
of the Act was a clear illegality and jurisdictional error committed by 
the High Court. The order of the High Court could not be sustained 
in the eye of law. 
10.	 In the result, the judgement and order dated 29.04.2025 in Criminal 
Appeal No.201 of 2025 passed by the High Court of Judicature at 
Bombay, Bench at Aurangabad is hereby set aside. The Appeal is 
allowed. The anticipatory bail granted to respondent No. 1 stands 
cancelled. 
10.1	 It is clarified at this stage that the observations and findings 
recorded in this judgment are of prima facie nature, limited for 
9	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 2015
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
299
Kiran v. Rajkumar Jivraj Jain & Anr.
the purpose of deciding the question of grant of anticipatory 
bail. The trial shall proceed independently on its own merits, 
uninfluenced by any observations herein.
In view of the disposal of the main appeal, all the interlocutory 
applications as may be pending stands disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan