[2025] 2 S.C.R. 388 : 2025 INSC 147
Ramu Appa Mahapatar 
v. 
The State of Maharashtra
(Criminal Appeal No. 608 of 2013)
04 February 2025
[Abhay S. Oka and Ujjal Bhuyan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether on the strength of the evidence of the four witnesses, 
the appellant-accused can be linked with the offence; whether it 
can be said that the charge against the accused of committing 
murder of the deceased stood conclusively proved beyond all 
reasonable doubt.
Headnotes†
Evidence – Circumstantial evidence – Extra-judicial 
confession – When cannot be relied upon – Appellant convicted 
for the murder of his live-in partner (‘M’), on the basis of 
extra-judicial confession allegedly made by him before PW-1 
(landlord) and PW-3 (brother of the deceased) endorsed by 
PW-4 (wife of PW-3) and PW-6:
Held: Where a case rests squarely on circumstantial evidence, 
inference of guilt can be justified only when all the incriminating 
facts and circumstances are found to be incompatible with the 
innocence of the accused or the guilt of any other person – The 
circumstances would not only have to be proved beyond reasonable 
doubt, but also have to be shown to be closely connected with the 
principal fact sought to be inferred from those circumstances – All 
these circumstances should be complete and there should be no 
gap left in the chain of evidence – The proved circumstances must 
be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused 
and totally inconsistent with his innocence – Conviction can be 
based solely on circumstantial evidence but, great care must be 
taken in evaluating it – If the evidence relied upon is reasonably 
capable of two inferences, the one in favour of the accused must 
be accepted – Conduct of the appellant was quite strange – Instead 
of confessing his guilt before the police/any other authority, he 
* Author
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
389
Ramu Appa Mahapatar v. The State of Maharashtra
first went to PW-1 and told him about the death of deceased; he 
further told him that he was on his way to the residence of the 
PW-3 to inform him about the development – He then went to the 
residence of PW-3 alongwith his son in a rickshaw and told PW-3 
about the death of deceased following assault on her by him – 
This he stated to PW-3 before PW-4 and PW-6 (person sitting on 
the steps of the house of PW-3) – Extrajudicial confession of the 
appellant lacked credibility as PW-3 clearly stated that the appellant 
was in a confused state of mind when he confessed before him –  
Accused was thus, not in a fit state of mind when he made the 
extra-judicial confession before PW-3 – Further, the testimonies 
of PW-3 and PW-6 also suffered from material omission –  
Testimony of prosecution witnesses lacks credibility and also hit 
by contradictions – No corroborating circumstances were brought 
on record by the prosecution – Though, there is a strong suspicion 
against the appellant but suspicion howsoever strong cannot take 
the place of hard evidence – Extra-judicial confession made before 
the witnesses lacks credibility and hence, cannot be relied upon –  
Appellant given benefit of doubt – Conviction and sentence of 
the appellant passed by the Sessions Judge as affirmed by the 
High Court, set aside and quashed – Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 – s.161. [Paras 16, 20, 22, 23-25]
Circumstantial evidence – Extra-judicial confession – 
Evidentiary value of – Discussed. [Paras 16-19.2]
Case Law Cited
State of Rajasthan v. Raja Ram [2003] Supp. 2 SCR 445 : (2003) 
8 SCC 180; Sansar Chand v. State of Rajasthan [2010] 12 SCR 
583 : (2010) 10 SCC 604; Sahadevan v. State of Tamil Nadu [2012] 
4 SCR 366 : (2012) 6 SCC 403; Alauddin v. State of Assam [2024] 
6 SCR 20 : (2024) SCC Online SC 760 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Evidence 
Act, 1872
List of Keywords
Circumstantial evidence; Extra-judicial confession; Murder; Live-in 
relationship; Chain of evidence; Inference of guilt; Incriminating 
390
facts and circumstances; Incompatible with the innocence of 
the accused; Guilt of any other person; Hypothesis of the guilt 
of the accused; Confused state of mind; Fit state of mind; 
Material omission; Testimony lacks credibility; Contradictions; No 
corroborating circumstances; Strong suspicion; Benefit of doubt; 
Not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
608 of 2013
From the Judgment and Order dated 02.12.2010 of the High Court 
of Bombay in CRLA No. 252 of 2005
Appearances for Parties
Dr. Nirmal Chopra, Adv. for the Appellant.
Sanjay Kharde, Sr. Adv., Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Aaditya 
Aniruddha Pande, Advs. for the Respondent.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Ujjal Bhuyan, J.
This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and 
order dated 02.12.2010 passed by the High Court of Bombay at 
Bombay (High Court) in Criminal Appeal No. 252 of 2005 (Ramu 
Appa Mahapatar Vs. State of Maharashtra) whereby the High Court 
dismissed Criminal Appeal No. 252 of 2005 filed by the appellant. 
2.	
Be it stated that the aforesaid criminal appeal was preferred against 
the judgment and order dated 15.10.2004 passed by the First Ad-hoc 
Additional District and Sessions Judge, Thane (Sessions Judge) in 
Sessions Case No. 52 of 2004 whereby and whereunder appellant 
was convicted under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1861 
(IPC) and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment (RI) for life 
and to pay fine of Rs. 1,000/-, in default to suffer RI for 3 months.
3.	
Prosecution case in brief is that appellant lived with deceased 
Manda; it was a live-in relationship. Both of them were living in 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
391
Ramu Appa Mahapatar v. The State of Maharashtra
a chawl of PW-1 Ravinder Gopal Jadhav, who was the landlord. 
Appellant informed PW-1 that his wife had expired and that he was 
going to her parents’ house at Dipchale village to inform them. 
Thereafter, appellant alongwith his son went to Dipchale village 
where appellant met the brother of the deceased, Bhagwan i.e. 
PW-3. Appellant told PW-3 in the presence of Shankar PW-6, 
Pandhari PW-5 and Chanda Bai PW-4 that there was a quarrel 
between him and Manda following which he had assaulted Manda 
who succumbed to the injuries.
3.1.	 Before the appellant could come back to his village Kudus 
alongwith the relatives of the deceased, PW-1 had already 
opened the door of the house which was bolted from outside. 
On opening of the door PW-1 noticed that Manda was lying 
dead with multiple bleeding injuries. Her mangalsutra and 
glass bangles were broken; some of the household articles 
were strewn around on the ground. When appellant reached 
the place of incident alongwith the relatives of the deceased 
Manda, PW-1 enquired from him about the incident. At that stage, 
appellant told PW-1 that deceased Manda had suspected that 
he (appellant) was having illicit relation with some other woman. 
This resulted in a quarrel in the course of which appellant had 
assaulted Manda with the help of a grinding stone and a stick.
3.2.	 PW-1 then lodged First Information Report (FIR) before the 
police station whereafter offence under Section 302 IPC was 
registered against the appellant.
3.3.	 Investigating officer carried out the investigation in the course 
of which he drew inquest panchanama, spot panchanama and 
made seizure of various articles from the place of incident. 
Appellant was arrested. The weapon of assault was seized. On 
completion of investigation, chargesheet was filed against the 
appellant charging him for committing an offence punishable 
under Section 302 IPC.
4.	
Learned Sessions Judge read over and explained the charge to 
the appellant to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed to be 
tried. To prove its case, prosecution examined 10 witnesses. It 
was a case of circumstantial evidence. Prosecution relied upon 
the extra-judicial confession of the appellant made before PW-1 
Ravindra, PW-3 Bhagwan, PW-4 Chandabai and PW-6 Shankar. 
392
After considering the evidence on record, learned Sessions Judge 
vide the judgment and order dated 15.10.2004 convicted the 
appellant under Section 302 IPC and sentenced him to undergo 
RI for life and also to pay fine of Rs. 1,000/-, in default to suffer 
RI for another 3 months.
5.	
Aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, appellant 
preferred appeal before the High Court being Criminal Appeal No. 
252 of 2005. By the judgment and order dated 02.12.2010 (impugned 
judgment), High Court dismissed the appeal of the appellant. 
Consequently, conviction and sentence of the appellant have been 
affirmed.
6.	
This Court by order dated 21.09.2012 had issued notice in the related 
petition for special leave to appeal (criminal). Leave was granted 
vide the order dated 15.04.2013. Hence, the present appeal.
7.	
Learned counsel for the appellant has taken us to the evidence of 
PW-1, PW-3, PW-4 and PW-6 and submits that the extra-judicial 
confession allegedly made by the appellant before the above 
witnesses could not be accepted as a valid piece of evidence. Extra-
judicial confession itself is a weak piece of circumstantial evidence. 
From the testimony of the above witnesses, it is clearly evident that 
no credence could be given to the theory of extra-judicial confession. 
Such confession does not inspire any confidence. Beyond the 
extra-judicial confession, there was no material on record to link 
the appellant with the death of the deceased. Learned trial court 
as well as the High Court had erred in placing reliance on the so-
called extra-judicial confessions and basing the conviction of the 
appellant on such evidence. He, therefore, submits that conviction 
of the appellant is wholly unsustainable and liable to be set aside. 
Resultantly, the appeal should be allowed.
8.	
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent supports the impugned 
judgment of the High Court. According to him, there is no reason to 
disbelieve the evidence of PWs 1, 3, 4 and 6. Therefore, the trial court 
was justified in convicting the appellant on the basis of confessional 
statement made by the appellant before the above witnesses. High 
Court had rightly affirmed such conviction and sentence of the learned 
Sessions Judge. He submits that there is no case for interference 
with the concurrent findings. Therefore, the criminal appeal is liable 
to be dismissed. 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
393
Ramu Appa Mahapatar v. The State of Maharashtra
9.	
Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties have received 
the due consideration of the Court.
10.	 PW-1 is the informant Ravindra; he is the owner of the chawl in which 
accused used to stay as the tenant alongwith his ‘wife’ and son. On 
21.03.2003 at about 06:15 AM, accused came to the residence of 
PW-1 alongwith his son and informed PW-1 that his wife had expired. 
Thereafter, the accused went to the house of the parents of his wife 
to call her relatives. PW-1 stated that he had gone to the house of 
the accused alongwith his brother and found that it was bolted from 
outside. Alongwith his brother Shyam Rao Gopal Jadhav, PW-1 
opened the door and saw that wife of the accused was lying dead 
on the floor in a pool of blood. 
10.1.	
Accused brought the brother of the deceased and 4/5 persons. 
They also saw the dead body. At that stage, PW-1 and his 
brother enquired with the accused who told them that he had 
assaulted the deceased with a grinding stone.
10.2.	
According to PW-1, he went to the police station and lodged 
the first information which he proved in the court alongwith 
its contents.
10.3.	
In cross-examination, he stated that the accused had only 
told him that his wife had expired. He had talked with the 
accused for about five minutes. Accused told him that he 
was going to call her relatives.
10.4.	
PW-1 denied the suggestion that accused was in a confused 
state of mind. He stated that he did not feel it necessary to 
inform the police immediately. He lodged the information 
between 12 noon to 12:15 PM. He also denied the suggestion 
that the accused had told him that some people had come 
in the night and had assaulted him and his wife whereafter 
they ran away. He further denied the suggestion that accused 
had told him that somebody had killed his wife and had also 
assaulted him.
11.	 PW-3 is Bhagwan. He is the brother of the deceased Manda. On 
21.09.2003 at 07:30 AM, he was sitting alongwith Maruti, Pandu 
Ram Thorat and Shankar Rama Bhoye in front of his house. At that 
time, accused came alongwith his son Kiran. He told them that there 
was a quarrel between him and deceased Manda because of which 
394
he had assaulted Manda. As a result of the injuries sustained, she 
died. Hearing this, PW-3 alongwith Maruti, Pandu Ram Thorat and 
Shankar Rama Bhoye went with the accused to his village.
11.1.	
When they reached the house of the accused, they found 
that the landlord (PW-1) was present there. They saw Manda 
lying dead in a pool of blood. She had injuries on her head, 
forehead and face. Her saree was soaked in blood and food 
was strewn around. Accused told them that he had assaulted 
the deceased with a grinding stone and a wooden stick. 
Thereafter, they alongwith the landlord (PW-1) went to the 
police station.
11.2.	
In his cross-examination, he stated that the accused and 
the deceased were not married but were staying together. 
The deceased used to complain to him that accused was 
beating her.
11.3.	
Accused told PW-3 and the others that Manda had expired 
whereupon he was asked as to how she had expired. Though 
Manda was the younger sister of PW-3, he did not ask the 
accused whether any complaint was lodged with the police. 
Maruti Thorat and Pandu Ram Thorat, who are the maternal 
uncles of PW-3, were present when PW-3 made enquiries 
with the accused. He had told his maternal uncles Maruti and 
Pandu Ram to handover the accused to the police.
11.4.	
PW-3 denied the suggestion that he was not sure as to 
whether the accused was speaking lies. Since he was to 
verify as to whether Manda had died, therefore they did not 
handover the accused to the police. PW-3 clearly stated that 
when the accused came, he was in a confused state of mind 
and he did not take tea. His clothes were not torn or blood 
stained. Accused had brought one mini door rickshaw and 
in that, PW-3 and the others went to his house. According 
to PW-3, he had stated before the police that accused had 
told him that he had assaulted Manda with a grinding stone 
and had killed her but did not know why it was not written. 
11.5.	
PW-3 stated that they reached the house of the accused 
around 10:00 AM and thereafter they alongwith the landlord 
went to the police station to lodge complaint. He denied the 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
395
Ramu Appa Mahapatar v. The State of Maharashtra
suggestion that the accused had never told him about his 
quarrel with his wife and that he had assaulted her because of 
which she died. He also denied the suggestion that accused 
had told him that in the night, some thieves had come and 
that they had assaulted him and Manda.
12.	 Chandabai is PW-4. She is the wife of PW-3. According to her, on 
21.09.2003 in the morning, her husband was chatting with Shankar, 
Maruti and Pandu Ram. Meanwhile, the accused came there alongwith 
his son Kiran and told them that he had quarrelled with Manda because 
of which he had assaulted her and she died. Leaving behind his son 
Kiran with PW-4, accused alongwith husband of PW-4 i.e. PW-3 and 
others went to Kudus i.e. the village of the accused.
12.1.	
In her cross-examination, she stated that she was residing 
alongwith her husband PW-3, their three children and now 
with Kiran, son of the accused. On the day of the incident, 
her husband PW-3 was sitting outside their home after his 
breakfast. She stated that she did not directly talk with the 
accused but came to know about the incident. She denied 
the suggestion that she only came to know about the incident 
when her husband PW-3 told her that Manda was assaulted. 
She denied the suggestion that accused had told her that on 
that fateful night, 3/4 persons entered their house and had 
assaulted Manda when the accused ran away alongwith his 
son from the house. She further denied the suggestion that in 
the morning, accused had come and found that Manda had 
died and therefore he informed the landlord and thereafter 
to PW-4 and others.
12.2.	
She denied the suggestion that the accused also had injuries 
and that his clothes were torn.
13.	 PW-6 Shankar was sitting on the steps of the house of Bhagwan 
i.e. PW-3 in the morning of 21.09.2003 alongwith Bhagwan, Maruti 
and Pandu Ram. Accused came there at about 07:30 AM. He had 
come in a rickshaw alongwith his son. Accused told Bhagwan that 
he had quarrelled with Manda during which he had assaulted her 
and that she had died.
13.1.	
PW-6 stated that son of the accused was kept with the wife 
of Bhagwan whereafter they all went to the residence of the 
396
accused at Kudus. In the house of the accused, they saw 
that Manda had already expired. She had injuries on her 
forehead, head and back. They also saw that bangles and 
mangal sutra were broken and that there was splattering of 
blood.
13.2.	
In his cross-examination, he stated that accused was with 
them for about half an hour to 45 minutes. He did not know 
the accused prior to that date. He denied the suggestion that 
the clothes of the accused were torn and that the accused 
was in a confused state of mind.
13.3.	
PW-6 further deposed that he had told the police that accused 
had told Bhagwan in their presence that he had a quarrel 
with Manda in the night but he did not know why it was not 
written that accused had told so to Bhagwan in his statement 
by the police.
13.4.	
PW-6 denied the suggestion that the accused had told them 
that in the night, 3/4 drunk persons had entered their house 
whereafter they had assaulted him and when they were about 
to assault his son, he ran away with his son.
14.	 The above four are the witnesses who had deposed that the accused 
had stated before the informant (PW-1) and PW-3 that he had a quarrel 
with Manda because of which he assaulted her with a grinding stone 
and a stick following which she died. There is no dispute about the 
multiple injuries seen on the body of the deceased or the homicidal 
nature of the death of the deceased. Question for consideration is 
whether on the strength of the evidence of the above four witnesses, 
the accused can be linked with the offence and as to whether it can 
be said that the charge against the accused of committing murder of 
the deceased stood conclusively proved beyond all reasonable doubt?
15.	 Before we analyse the evidence of the above witnesses, it is necessary 
to briefly examine the law relating to extra-judicial confession as 
the present is a case of extra-judicial confession allegedly made 
by the accused before PW-1 and PW-3 which were endorsed by 
PW-4 and PW-6.
16.	 Extra-judicial confession of an offence made by the accused before 
a witness is one of the several instances of circumstantial evidence; 
there are other circumstances, such as, the theory of last seen 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
397
Ramu Appa Mahapatar v. The State of Maharashtra
together; conduct of the accused before or immediately after the 
incident; human blood being found on the clothes or person of the 
accused which matches with that of the accused; leading to discovery, 
recovery of weapon etc. As we know, circumstantial evidence is not 
direct to the point in issue but consists of evidence of various other 
facts which are so closely associated with the fact in issue that taken 
together, they form a chain of circumstances from which the existence 
of the principal fact can be legally inferred or presumed. The chain 
must be complete and each fact forming part of the chain must be 
proved. It has been consistently laid down by this Court that where a 
case rests squarely on circumstantial evidence, inference of guilt can 
be justified only when all the incriminating facts and circumstances 
are found to be incompatible with the innocence of the accused or 
the guilt of any other person. The circumstances would not only 
have to be proved beyond reasonable doubt, those would also have 
to be shown to be closely connected with the principal fact sought 
to be inferred from those circumstances. All these circumstances 
should be complete and there should be no gap left in the chain of 
evidence. The proved circumstances must be consistent only with 
the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused and totally inconsistent 
with his innocence. The circumstances taken cumulatively must be 
so complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that within 
all human probability the crime was committed by the accused and 
none else. While there is no doubt that conviction can be based 
solely on circumstantial evidence but great care must be taken 
in evaluating circumstantial evidence. If the evidence relied upon 
is reasonably capable of two inferences, the one in favour of the 
accused must be accepted.
17.	 In State of Rajasthan Vs. Raja Ram,1 this Court explained the 
concept of extra-judicial confession. Confession may be divided into 
two classes i.e. judicial and extra-judicial. Judicial confessions are 
those which are made before a magistrate or a court in the course of 
judicial proceedings. Extra-judicial confessions are those which are 
made by the party elsewhere than before a magistrate or a court. 
Extra-judicial confessions are generally those that are made by a 
party before a private individual who may be a judicial officer also in 
his private capacity. As to extra-judicial confessions, two questions 
1	
(2003) 8 SCC 180
398
arise: firstly, whether they are made voluntarily and secondly, are 
they true? If the court is of the opinion that the confession was 
not made voluntarily but was a result of an inducement, threat or 
promise, it would not be acted upon. It follows that a confession 
would be voluntary if it is made by the accused in a fit state of mind 
and if it is not caused by any inducement, threat or promise having 
reference to the charge against him proceeding from a person in 
authority. Whether or not the confession was voluntary would depend 
upon the facts and circumstances of each case judged in the light 
of Section 24 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (briefly ‘the Evidence 
Act’ hereinafter). The law is clear that a confession cannot be used 
against an accused person unless the court is satisfied that it was 
voluntary. At that stage, the question whether it is true or false does 
not arise. If the facts and circumstances surrounding the making of a 
confession appear to cast a doubt on the veracity and voluntariness 
of the confession, the court may refuse to act upon the confession 
even if it is admissible in evidence. The question whether a confession 
is voluntary or not is always a question of fact. A free and voluntary 
confession is deserving of the highest credit because it is presumed 
to flow from the highest sense of guilt.
17.1.	
An extra-judicial confession, if voluntary and true and made 
in a fit state of mind, can be relied upon by the court. The 
confession will have to be proved like any other fact. The 
value of the evidence as to confession like any other evidence 
depends upon the reliability of the witness to whom it is 
made and who gives the evidence. Extra-judicial confession 
can be relied upon and conviction can be based thereon if 
the evidence about the confession comes from a witness 
who appear to be unbiased, not even remotely inimical to 
the accused, and in respect of whom nothing is brought out 
which may tend to indicate that he may have a motive of 
attributing an untruthful statement to the accused. The words 
spoken by the witness should be clear, unambiguous and 
unmistakenly convey that the accused is the perpetrator of 
the crime and that nothing is omitted by the witness which 
may militate against it. After subjecting the evidence of the 
witness to a rigorous test on the touchstone of credibility, 
the extra-judicial confession can be accepted and can be 
the basis of a conviction if it passes the test of credibility.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
399
Ramu Appa Mahapatar v. The State of Maharashtra
17.2.	
If the evidence relating to extra-judicial confession is found 
credible after being tested on the touchstone of credibility 
and acceptability, it can solely form the basis of conviction. 
The requirement of corroboration is a matter of prudence 
and not an invariable rule of law.
18.	 In Sansar Chand Vs. State of Rajasthan,2 this Court accepted the 
admissibility of extra-judicial confession and held that there is no 
absolute rule that an extra-judicial confession can never be the basis 
of a conviction although ordinarily an extra-judicial confession should 
be corroborated by some other material.
19.	 Evidentiary value of an extra-judicial confession was again examined 
in detail by this Court in Sahadevan Vs. State of Tamil Nadu.3 That 
was also a case where conviction was based on extra-judicial 
confession. This Court held that in a case based on circumstantial 
evidence, the onus lies upon the prosecution to prove the complete 
chain of events which shall undoubtedly point towards the guilt of the 
accused. That apart, in a case of circumstantial evidence where the 
prosecution relies upon an extra-judicial confession, the court has 
to examine the same with a greater degree of care and caution. An 
extra-judicial confession, if voluntary and true and made in a fit state 
of mind can be relied upon by the court. However, the confession 
will have to be proved like any other fact. The value of the evidence 
as to confession like any other evidence depends upon the veracity 
of the witness to whom it has been made.
19.1.	
This Court acknowledged that extra-judicial confession is a 
weak piece of evidence. Wherever the court intends to base 
a conviction on an extra-judicial confession, it must ensure 
that the same inspires confidence and is corroborated by 
other prosecution evidence. If the extra-judicial confession 
suffers from material discrepancies or inherent improbabilities 
and does not appear to be cogent, such evidence should 
not be considered. This Court held as follows:-
14. It is a settled principle of criminal jurisprudence 
that extra-judicial confession is a weak piece 
of evidence. Wherever the court, upon due 
2	
(2010) 10 SCC 604
3	
(2012) 6 SCC 403
400
appreciation of the entire prosecution evidence, 
intends to base a conviction on an extra-judicial 
confession, it must ensure that the same inspires 
confidence and is corroborated by other prosecution 
evidence. If, however, the extra-judicial confession 
suffers from material discrepancies or inherent 
improbabilities and does not appear to be cogent 
as per the prosecution version, it may be difficult 
for the court to base a conviction on such a 
confession. In such circumstances, the court 
would be fully justified in ruling such evidence out 
of consideration.
19.2.	
Upon an indepth analysis of judicial precedents, this Court in 
Sahadevan (supra) summed up the principles which would 
make an extra-judicial confession an admissible piece of 
evidence capable of forming the basis of conviction of an 
accused:
(i)	
The extra-judicial confession is a weak evidence by 
itself. It has to be examined by the court with greater 
care and caution.
(ii)	
It should be made voluntarily and should be truthful.
(iii)	 It should inspire confidence.
(iv)	 An extra-judicial confession attains greater credibility 
and evidentiary value if it is supported by a chain of 
cogent circumstances and is further corroborated by 
other prosecution evidence.
(v)	
For an extra-judicial confession to be the basis of 
conviction, it should not suffer from any material 
discrepancies and inherent improbabilities.
(vi)	 Such statement essentially has to be proved like any 
other fact and in accordance with law.
20.	 Having surveyed the principles governing the acceptability and 
evidentiary value of an extra-judicial confession, we may now advert 
to such confession made by the accused before PW-1, PW-3, PW-4 
and PW-6. It is on record that PW-3 in his cross-examination was 
quite categorical in deposing that he found the accused to be in a 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
401
Ramu Appa Mahapatar v. The State of Maharashtra
confused state of mind. This factum has also come on record in the 
testimony of the other witnesses before whom such confession was 
made. In other words, the accused was not in a fit state of mind 
when he made the extra-judicial confession before PW-3. That apart, 
there were no blood stains on the clothes worn by the accused; 
not to speak of any such blood samples matching with the blood of 
the deceased. While various articles were seized from the place of 
occurrence, there was no recovery of any blood-stained clothes. There 
is no evidence on record that the grinding stone was recovered or 
that there were any blood stains on the recovered stick, not to speak 
of such blood stains matching the blood of the deceased. Moreover, 
we find the conduct of the accused to be quite strange; instead of 
confessing his guilt before the police or any other authority, he first 
goes to PW-1, the landlord, and tells him about the death of Manda; 
further telling him that he was on his way to the residence of the 
brother of Manda (PW-3) to inform him about the development. He 
goes to the residence of PW-3 alongwith his son in a rickshaw and 
tells PW-3 about the death of Manda following assault on her by 
him. This he stated to PW-3 before PW-4 and PW-6. What is more 
strange is the reaction or non-reaction of PW-3 when the accused 
confessed before him that he had killed his sister Manda. This is 
not at all a normal behaviour of a brother. He would have certainly 
reacted strongly when he heard the accused saying that he had 
killed his sister. Instead of any such reaction, as per the prosecution 
case, PW-3 accompanied the accused back to his residence. Further, 
PW-4 stated in her cross-examination that she did not talk with the 
accused directly but came to know about the incident. This clearly 
puts her testimony under a cloud. 
21.	 There is one more aspect which we would like to flag off. From the 
evidence on record, we find that there is a clear material omission 
in the cross-examination of PW-3. According to the testimony of 
PW-3, he had stated before the police that the accused had told him 
that he had assaulted Manda with a grinding stone and had killed 
her but the same was not recorded by the police in his statement 
under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C.). 
Similarly, PW-6 in his deposition stated that he had told the police 
that the accused had told Bhagwan (PW-3) in his presence that he 
had a quarrel with Manda in the night but the police did not record 
in his statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
402
22.	 From the above, it is evident that not only the extra-judicial 
confession of the accused lacks credibility as PW-3 is clearly on 
record stating that the accused was in a confused state of mind 
when he confessed before him, the testimonies of PW-3 and PW-6 
suffer from material omission. Their statements made under Section 
161 Cr.P.C. are at variance with their evidence in court regarding 
the confession made by the accused before PW-3. This Court 
in Alauddin Vs. State of Assam4 explained the context in which 
an omission occurs and when such an omission amounts to a 
contradiction. In the light of the Explanation to Section 162 of the 
Cr.P.C., this Court held as follows:
7. When the two statements cannot stand together, they 
become contradictory statements. When a witness makes 
a statement in his evidence before the court which is 
inconsistent with what he has stated in his statement 
recorded by the police, there is a contradiction. When a 
prosecution witness whose statement under Section 161(1) 
or Section 164 of CrPC has been recorded states factual 
aspects before the court which he has not stated in his prior 
statement recorded under Section 161(1) or Section 164 
of CrPC, it is said that there is an omission. There will be 
an omission if the witness has omitted to state a fact in his 
statement recorded by the police, which he states before 
the court in his evidence. The Explanation to Section 162 
CrPC indicates that an omission may amount to a 
contradiction when it is significant and relevant. Thus, every 
omission is not a contradiction. It becomes a contradiction 
provided it satisfies the test laid down in the Explanation 
under Section 162. Therefore, when an omission becomes 
a contradiction, the procedure provided in the proviso 
to sub-Section (1) of Section 162 must be followed for 
contradicting witnesses in the cross-examination.
23.	 As observed above, the testimony of the prosecution witnesses 
suffers from serious lack of credibility and also hit by contradictions 
which strike at the very root of the prosecution case. No corroborating 
circumstances have been brought on record by the prosecution.	
4	
(2024) SCC Online SC 760
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
403
Ramu Appa Mahapatar v. The State of Maharashtra
24.	 No doubt there is a strong suspicion against the appellant and the 
needle of suspicion qua the death of Manda points towards him but 
as is the settled jurisprudence of this country, suspicion howsoever 
strong cannot take the place of hard evidence. The evidence on 
the basis of which the prosecution seeks conviction of the accused 
i.e. extra-judicial confession made before the above witnesses lack 
credibility and hence cannot be relied upon. Besides, the evidence 
suffers from material contradiction. Therefore, it would be wholly 
unsafe to sustain the conviction of the appellant based on such 
weak circumstantial evidence which on the top of it lack credibility.
25.	 For the aforesaid reasons, we are of the view that the appellant 
must get the benefit of doubt. In view of the above, the conviction 
and sentence of the appellant vide the judgment and order dated 
15.10.2004 passed by the Sessions Judge in Sessions Case No. 52 
of 2004 as affirmed by the High Court vide the judgment and order 
dated 02.12.2010 passed in Criminal Appeal No. 252 of 2005, are 
hereby set aside and quashed. Since the appellant is in detention, 
he shall be released from custody forthwith if not required in any 
other case.
26.	 Criminal appeal is accordingly allowed. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey