[2025] 2 S.C.R. 1790 : 2025 INSC 317
Sanjay 
v.  
State of Uttar Pradesh
(Criminal Appeal No. 239 of 2025)
06 February 2025
[Vikram Nath, Sanjay Karol* and Sandeep Mehta, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The Appellant/accused was convicted under Section 302 IPC 
and 376(2)(G) IPC for alleged murder of a four-year-old girl. The 
Trial Court convicted the Appellant and sentenced him to death, 
which was later confirmed by the High Court. The High Court 
confirmed the sentence based on key findings. The victim’s dead 
body was recovered following the accused’s disclosure and was 
identified by PW1, the victim’s father. The last-seen evidence 
was firmly established through the testimonies of PW1, PW2, 
PW3, PW6, and PW7, confirming that the victim was last seen 
with the accused. The accused’s confession was corroborated by 
evidence, including the recovery of the victim’s clothing (frock and 
underwear) and her body, strengthening the prosecution’s case. 
The circumstantial evidence was comprehensive and unerringly 
pointed to the accused’s guilt, forming a logical chain with no 
alternate explanation. Given the heinous nature of the crime, 
the High Court held that the Trial Court had rightly imposed the 
death penalty.
Whether, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the sentence 
of death penalty imposed on the Appellant by the Trial Court 
confirmed by the High Court can be interfered with.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – s.302 – Murder of four-year-old minor girl – 
Sentence of death penalty imposed by the Trial Court & High 
Court – Accused acquitted for want of conclusive evidence 
to point at guilt of Accused:
Held: The case at hand is one based on circumstantial evidence – It 
is the settled law that in a case based on circumstantial evidence, 
the prosecution must convince the Court that circumstances point 
* Author
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1791
Sanjay v. State of Uttar Pradesh
towards the guilt of the accused alone and none else, as also 
lack of his innocence – The conviction handed to the accused-
appellant has been based on (a) last seen circumstance; (b) 
extra-judicial confession given by him, leading to the recovery of 
the dead body of ‘X’ along with articles worn by her at the time 
of death; (c) the FSL Report of the articles recovered, both of the 
deceased and the accused – The conviction of the accused by 
the Courts below is based on improper appreciation of evidence 
on record and in correct appreciation of settled principles of 
law resulting in the travesty of justice – The entire case of the 
prosecution, from its genesis, is doubtful – In the first instance, 
the conduct of the accused does not give rise to suspicion – PW1 
and PW2 have deposed to the fact that the appellant was part of 
the search parties for 5-6 days after the incident – It is improbable 
that a person who killed ‘X’ would have been there all along, as 
a search party looking for her – None suspected him and pointed 
a finger of suspension against him, despite the hypothesis of 
the last seen theory – Another aspect which creates doubt in 
the prosecution story is that for six days from when the child 
disappears, there is not a single person who lodges a missing 
report with the police or any other authority – This aspect is more 
suspicious coupled with the deposition of PW1 to 3, PW6 and PW7.  
[Paras 15, 17-20]
Furthermore, the body of ‘X’ was recovered in an open sugarcane 
field six days after the incident – PWs 2 and 3 deposed that a 
foul smell was coming from the spot as well – However, no single 
villager came upon this open spot for six days, which creates 
suspicion in our minds about the prosecution story – The field 
is not a jungle; it was cultivated; sugarcane crop was grown; it 
was privately owned; and the village was inhabited, hence, it is 
unbelievable that no one noticed the foul smell, particularly when 
the entire area was combed over for nearly 5-6 days. [Para 21]
Penal Code, 1860 – Section 302 – Circumstantial evidence – 
When two views possible, one in favour of Accused to be 
adopted:
Held: Reliance placed on Pradeep Kumar v. State of Haryana 
(2024) 3 SCC 324 where it has been held that in circumstantial 
evidence cases, all facts must be consistent with the hypothesis 
of the accused’s guilt, excluding his innocence and also exclusion 
of third-party involvement – Reliance placed on Pradeep Kumar v. 
1792
Supreme Court Reports
State of Chhattisgarh (2023) 5 SCC 350 where it has been held 
that in cases where there is a heavy reliance on circumstantial 
evidence and on a perusal of evidence, two views are possible, 
the one which is favourable to the accused must be adopted. 
[Para 16]
Penal Code, 1860 – Section 302 – Extra-judicial confession – 
Trustworthiness of extrajudicial confession depends on the 
trustworthiness of the witness before whom it is given – Extra-
judicial evidence to be supported by other evidence:
Held: The extra-judicial confession and the consequent recovery 
are also surrounded by suspicious circumstances – There is no 
doubt that the case of the prosecution depends entirely on the 
extra judicial confession of the accused leading to the recovery of 
body from the sugarcane field, along with other articles worn by 
the deceased – Reliance placed on Kalinga v. State of Karnataka 
(2024) 4 SCC 735 – If extra-judicial confession is not supported 
by other evidence on record, it fails to inspire confidence and in 
such a case, it shall not be treated as a strong piece of evidence 
for the purpose of arriving at the conclusion of guilt – The extent 
of acceptability of an extra-judicial confession depends on the 
trustworthiness of the witness before whom it is given and the 
circumstances in which it was given – The prosecution must 
establish that a confession was indeed made by the accused, that 
it was voluntary in nature and that the contents of the confession 
were true – The standard required for proving an extra-judicial 
confession to the satisfaction of the Court is on the higher side 
and these essential ingredients must be established beyond any 
reasonable doubt – The standard becomes even higher when the 
entire case of the prosecution necessarily rests on the extrajudicial 
confession – Reliance placed on Nikhil Chandra Mondal v. State 
of W.B. (2023) 6 SCC 605 where it has been held that where 
suspicious circumstances surround an extra-judicial confession, 
its credibility becomes doubtful and loses. [Paras 23-26]
Penal Code, 1860 – Section 302 – Requirement of independent 
witnesses to prove in the case of circumstantial evidence:
Held: The most pertinent suspicion in the prosecution case is that 
no single independent witness is adjoined or examined in support 
of the confession or consequent recovery – The recovery of the 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1793
Sanjay v. State of Uttar Pradesh
body of the deceased is from a field which is accessible and open 
to the public, which further warrants need for an independent 
witness – Given the availability of independent witnesses in this 
case, the investigating officer has deliberated to exclude them. 
[Paras 29, 30]
Case Law Cited
Pritinder Singh alias Lovely v. State of Punjab [2023] 10 SCR 
1033 : (2023) 7 SCC 727; Pradeep Kumar v. State of Haryana 
[2024] 1 SCR 306 : (2024) 3 SCC 324; Pradeep Kumar v. State of 
Chhattisgarh [2023] 2 SCR 682 : (2023) 5 SCC 350; Kali Ram v. 
State of H.P. [1974] 1 SCR 722 : (1973) 2 SCC 808; Kalinga v. 
State of Karnataka [2024] 2 SCR 391 : (2024) 4 SCC 735; Nikhil 
Chandra Mondal v. State of W.B. [2023] 2 SCR 20 : (2023) 6 SCC 
605; Krishnan v. State of T.N. [2014] 9 SCR 340 : (2014) 12 SCC 
279; Randeep Singh v. State of Haryana, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 
3383; Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra [1985] 
1 SCR 88 : (1984) 4 SCC 116 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Death Penalty; Murder; Minor.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
239 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 26.07.2005 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in CRLA No. 4911 of 2004
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Dr. S. Muralidhar, Sr. Adv., Ms. Pratiksha Basarkar, Maitreya 
Subramaniam, Anish R. Shah.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Suryaprakash V. Raju, A.S.G., Ms. Garima Prashad, Sr. A.A.G., 
Zoheb Hussain, Annam Venkatesh, Samrat Goswami, Arvind Kumar 
1794
Supreme Court Reports
Sharma, Dr. Vijendra Singh, Deepak Goel, Shailesh Sharma, 
Kumar Abhinandan, Ms. Apurva Mahndiyan, Pradeep Misra, Daleep 
Dhyani, Suraj Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
Sanjay Karol, J.
1.	
The present appeal arises from the final judgment and order dated 
26th July, 2005 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad 
in Criminal Appeal No.4911 of 2004 & Reference No.15, which 
confirmed the judgment and order dated 21st September, 2004 
passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court No.16, 
Bulandshahar, in Sessions Case No.306/2004 whereby the accused-
appellant, Sanjay, was convicted under Section 302 and 376(2)(G) 
of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter ‘IPC’) and sentenced to death. 
The incident in question relates to the alleged rape and murder of 
a four-year-old girl child.
Prosecution Case
2.	
The prosecution case emerging from the record, as also set out by 
the Courts below, is as under :
2.1	 On 22nd April, 2004, Sanjay (hereinafter referred to as the 
accused) accompanied the complainant’s daughter, aged 4 
years (hereinafter referred to as ‘X’) and her paternal aunt, 
Rajkumari, to the marriage of one Naresh. It was part of seven 
combined marriages taking place at the same hall. After some 
time, the accused informed Rajkumari that he was taking ‘X’ 
home. However, ‘X’ did not reach home. On query the accused 
informed that he had left her at the marriage hall itself. 
2.2	 Later, on 28th August, 2004, on questioning, the accused 
confessed to having left the body of ‘X’ in the sugarcane field 
after committing rape and murder. Upon discovery of the dead 
body, the complainant lodged an FIR being Criminal Case 
No.36/2004, P.S. Jahangirabad on 28.02.2004 at 5:45 PM under 
Sections 376, 302 and 201 IPC.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1795
Sanjay v. State of Uttar Pradesh
2.3	 S.I. Jai Ram Yadav commenced investigation of the incident, 
before whom also the accused confessed his guilt and got 
recovered specific articles from the spot where he had disposed 
of the body of the deceased.
2.4	 With the completion of investigation, the challan was presented 
in the Court for trial, where the prosecution examined eight 
witnesses and marked Exhibits Ka 1 to Ka 17. The defence 
did not adduce any oral evidence. 
The reasoning of the Courts below
3.	
The Trial Court, after elaborate consideration, vide judgment and 
order dated 20th September, 2004, convicted the accused under 
Section 376, 302 and 201 of the IPC. The Court gave the following 
findings:
a.	
On consideration of the testimonies of PW1 and PW5, the 
identity of the body recovered, being ‘X’, was not in doubt.
b.	
Given the testimonies of PW1 and PW2, the confessional 
statement of the accused stood proved, leading to the conclusion 
that it was he who had killed the deceased by strangulation.
c.	
Recoveries of articles related to the crime, made at the behest of 
the accused, are admissible under S.27 of the Indian Evidence 
Act as proven through PW1, PW2 and PW8.
d.	
PW3, PW6 and PW7 prove that ‘X’ was last seen with the 
accused. 
e.	
The chain of circumstantial evidence is complete against the 
accused.
f.	
Given the nature of crime committed on the deceased child, 
the death sentence is appropriate to be awarded. 
4.	
The accused-appellant preferred an appeal before the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad, which was numbered as Criminal Appeal 
No.4911 of 2004. A reference for confirmation of the death sentence 
was also submitted to the High Court, which came to be numbered 
as Reference No.15 in consonance with Section 366 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. Vide the impugned judgment and order 
dated 26th July, 2005, the High Court confirmed the conviction and 
death sentence awarded to the accused, giving the following findings:
1796
Supreme Court Reports
a.	
The evidence on record shows that the dead body was recovered 
on the pointing out of the accused and identified by PW1, the 
father of the deceased.
b.	
After considering the testimonies of PW1, PW2, PW3, PW6, 
and PW7, the circumstances of the last sight of the deceased 
with the accused stood established.
c.	
The confession made by the accused stood proved by cogent 
evidence. The recovery of the dead body, frock, and underwear 
on the pointing out of the accused corroborated the extra-judicial 
confession, which was a very strong circumstance against him.
d.	
The circumstances taken cumulatively pointed unerringly 
towards the guilt of the accused and formed a chain so complete 
that there is no escape from such a conclusion.
e.	
The Sessions Judge had rightly sentenced the accused to death. 
Issue for consideration
5.	
The question that arises for consideration before this Court is whether 
or not the conviction and sentence imposed by the Trial Court, as 
affirmed by the High Court, are sustainable in law.
Our View
6.	
We now proceed to examine the prosecution case, as has unfurled 
through the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses. 
PW
Name
Role
Relation
1
Dinesh
Complainant
Father of X
2
Lakhpat
Witness to extra-judicial 
confession, last seen and 
recovery
Grandparent 
of X
3
Rajkumar
Witness to extra-judicial 
confession, last seen and 
recovery
Aunt of X
4
C.P. Rajpal Singh
Registration of FIR
-
5
Dr. Yashwant Singh
Post-mortem
-
6
Santo
Last seen witness
Not related
7
Babli
Last seen witness
Not related
8
S.I. Ram Yadav
Investigating Officer
-
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1797
Sanjay v. State of Uttar Pradesh
7.	
PW1, Dinesh is the father of the deceased. He deposed that he 
knew the accused as he was the son of his maternal uncle and 
had resided in his house for the last 8 months. On 22nd February, 
2004, he went to the wedding of one Naresh along with his family. 
His sister-in-law Rajkumari (PW3) informed him that the accused 
had taken ‘X’ home from the wedding hall. However, when they 
returned home, ‘X’ was not found. The accused told him that he had 
left ‘X’ at the wedding hall. Thereafter, despite continuous search, 
his daughter was not found. 
8.	
Further that, when 8 days after the incident, he, along with 
Rameshwar, Lakhpat Singh (PW2) and Ramachandra, enquired about 
the whereabouts of ‘X’ from the accused, he confessed of having 
committed an act of rape and murder of ‘X’. The accused then took 
them to the sugarcane field, where he pointed out the body of the 
deceased child and other articles worn by her. Consequently, they 
proceeded to the police station, where Gyanendra Singh lodged 
a report. He identifies his signature on the FIR (Ex. Ka-1) and the 
recovery memo. Lastly, he identified the accused in the Court. In his 
cross-examination, he deposed that he had left his daughter with his 
sister-in-law Rajkumari while leaving the wedding venue. He further 
stated that the accused was part of the search efforts and confessed 
his crime at the marriage hall.
9.	
PW2, Lakhpat deposed that he had accompanied the accused to 
the marriage hall. His testimony is similar to that of PW1. ‘X’ was his 
grand daughter. He deposed that the accused took ‘X’ with him from 
the marriage hall. The accused had also joined the party searching 
for the deceased, which continued for 5-6 days. Thereafter, at the 
marriage hall, the accused confessed that he had committed rape and 
murder of ‘X’ by strangulation. He further deposed to having witnessed 
recovery of the body of the deceased at the behest of accused. 
10.	 PW3, Rajkumari is the aunt of ‘X’. She deposed that at the marriage 
hall, around 2:00 PM, the accused left with the deceased child. The 
accused seemed dull from the date of the incident and was not eating 
properly. Pertinently, she deposed that the accused confessed to 
the crime in the field near tube well. This is in contradiction to the 
statements of PWs 1 and 2, who deposed that the confession took 
place in the marriage hall. Moreover, in the cross-examination, PW3 
then states that she has not witnessed the confession. 
1798
Supreme Court Reports
11.	 PW4, C.P. Rajpal Singh, is the police officer who had made GD Entry 
of the crime based on the written complaint of PW1. He verified his 
signature on Ex. K-3. 
12.	 PW5, Dr. Yashwant Singh, is the medical officer who conducted a 
post-mortem on the deceased. He deposed that animals ate away 
some parts of the dead body. The reason for death, time of death, 
and sex could not be determined due to the condition of the dead 
body. He verified his signature on Ex. K-4.
13.	 PW6, Santo, and PW7, Babli, deposed that they saw the accused 
leaving the marriage hall with the deceased child. 
14.	 PW8, S.I. Jai Ram Yadav, is the investigating officer of the case. 
He deposed that on 28th February, 2004, he took the statement of 
accused-appellant confessing the crime. Furthermore, the accused 
disclosed that the dead body was lying in the field of sugarcane. 
Thereafter, he along with PW1, constables, and some other people, 
came to the sugarcane field where the dead body was recovered. 
PW1 identified the dead body, after which the recovery memo was 
drawn (Ex.Ka-5), which bears his signature. Other articles recovered 
from near the body of the deceased, i.e., the shirt’s button and hair 
of the deceased, were recorded vide memo Ex.-Ka-6. The accused 
took him to the house of PW1, where he recovered the clothes (Ex. 
Ka-8) worn on the day of the incident. He further deposed that the 
underwear and frock of the deceased, along with the clothes of the 
accused, were sent to the forensic laboratory Agra for testing, the 
report of which remained awaited on the date of the examination. 
In his cross-examination, he deposed that the accused had suffered 
injuries during an inquiry by witnesses. 
15.	 Undoubtedly, the case at hand is one based on circumstantial 
evidence. It is the settled law that in a case based on circumstantial 
evidence, the prosecution must convince the Court that circumstances 
point towards the guilt of the accused alone and none else, as also 
lack of his innocence. This Court in Pritinder Singh alias Lovely v. 
State of Punjab1 succinctly summarized the position of law on 
circumstantial evidence :
1	
(2023) 7 SCC 727
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1799
Sanjay v. State of Uttar Pradesh
“17. It can thus be seen that this Court has held that the 
circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be 
drawn should be fully established. It has been held that 
the circumstances concerned “must or should” and not 
“may be” established. It has been held that there is not 
only a grammatical but a legal distinction between “may 
be proved” and “must be or should be proved”. It has been 
held that the facts so established should be consistent 
only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that 
is to say, they should not be explainable on any other 
hypothesis except that the accused is guilty. It has been 
held that the circumstances should be of a conclusive 
nature and tendency and they should exclude every 
possible hypothesis except the one sought to be proved, 
and that there must be a chain of evidence so complete so 
as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion 
consistent with the innocence of the accused and must 
show that in all human probability the act must have been 
done by the accused.
18. It is a settled principle of law that, however strong a 
suspicion may be, it cannot take the place of proof beyond 
a reasonable doubt. In the light of these guiding principles, 
we will have to consider the present case.”
(Emphasis supplied)
16.	 More recently, this came to be reiterated by this Court in Pradeep 
Kumar v. State of Haryana2 observing that in circumstantial 
evidence cases, all facts must be consistent with the hypothesis 
of the accused’s guilt, excluding his innocence and also exclusion 
of third-party involvement. Moreover, in Pradeep Kumar v. State 
of Chhattisgarh,3 this Court clarified that in cases where there is 
a heavy reliance on circumstantial evidence and on a perusal of 
evidence, two views are possible, the one which is favourable to the 
accused must be adopted. [See also: Kali Ram v. State of H.P.4]
2	
(2024) 3 SCC 324
3	
(2023) 5 SCC 350
4	
(1973) 2 SCC 808
1800
Supreme Court Reports
17.	 The conviction handed to the accused-appellant has been based on 
(a) last seen circumstance; (b) extra-judicial confession given by him, 
leading to the recovery of the dead body of ‘X’ along with articles 
worn by her at the time of death; (c) the FSL Report of the articles 
recovered, both of the deceased and the accused. 
18.	 In the considered view of this Court, the conviction of the accused 
by the Courts below is based on improper appreciation of evidence 
on record and in correct appreciation of settled principles of law 
resulting in the travesty of justice. The entire case of the prosecution, 
from its genesis, is doubtful. 
19.	 In the first instance, the conduct of the accused does not give rise to 
suspicion. PW1 and PW2 have deposed to the fact that the appellant 
was part of the search parties for 5-6 days after the incident. He 
was always present. In our view, it is improbable that a person who 
killed ‘X’ would have been there all along, as a search party looking 
for her. None suspected him. None pointed a finger of suspension 
against him, despite the hypothesis of the last seen theory. 
20.	 Another aspect which creates doubt in the prosecution story is that 
for six days from when the child disappears, there is not a single 
person who lodges a missing report with the police or any other 
authority. This aspect is more suspicious coupled with the deposition 
of PW1 to 3, PW6 and PW7. All these witnesses deposed that 
they had last seen ‘X’, leaving the marriage hall with the accused. 
Despite all these witnesses having made this observation, neither 
raises a suspicion nor registers a complaint about the missing 
child. The explanation given by PWs 1 and 2 that for six days 
they were searching for the child in other villages only renders the 
genuineness of the prosecution story to be unbelievable. There 
is no reason ascribed to why they thought ‘X’ would have been 
taken to another village, and there is no evidence to support the 
claim that they actually visited other areas around the spot of the 
incident. Possibility of involvement of others, including PW3, who 
also appeared to be a suspect, as is evident from the examination, 
cannot be ruled out.
21.	 Furthermore, the body of ‘X’ was recovered in an open sugarcane 
field six days after the incident. PWs 2 and 3 deposed that a foul 
smell was coming from the spot as well. However, no single villager 
came upon this open spot for six days, which creates suspicion in 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1801
Sanjay v. State of Uttar Pradesh
our minds about the prosecution story. The field is not a jungle; it 
was cultivated; sugarcane crop was grown; it was privately owned; 
and the village was inhabited, hence, it is unbelievable that no one 
noticed the foul smell, particularly when the entire area was combed 
over for nearly 5-6 days.
22.	 These circumstances make us doubt the genesis of the prosecution 
story as also the veracity of the prosecution witnesses and their 
testimonies.
23.	 There is no doubt that the case of the prosecution depends entirely 
on the extra judicial confession of the accused on 28th February, 
2004, leading to the recovery of body from the sugarcane field, along 
with other articles worn by the deceased. 
24.	 The principles of the evidentiary value of an extra-judicial confession 
are summarized by this Court recently in Kalinga v. State of 
Karnataka5 as under :
“16. It is no more res integra that an extra-judicial 
confession must be accepted with great care and caution. 
If it is not supported by other evidence on record, it fails 
to inspire confidence and in such a case, it shall not be 
treated as a strong piece of evidence for the purpose of 
arriving at the conclusion of guilt. Furthermore, the extent 
of acceptability of an extra-judicial confession depends 
on the trustworthiness of the witness before whom it is 
given and the circumstances in which it was given. The 
prosecution must establish that a confession was indeed 
made by the accused, that it was voluntary in nature 
and that the contents of the confession were true. The 
standard required for proving an extra-judicial confession 
to the satisfaction of the Court is on the higher side and 
these essential ingredients must be established beyond 
any reasonable doubt. The standard becomes even higher 
when the entire case of the prosecution necessarily rests 
on the extra-judicial confession.”
(Emphasis supplied)
5	
(2024) 4 SCC 735
1802
Supreme Court Reports
25.	 We must also advert to the exposition of this Court in Nikhil Chandra 
Mondal v. State of W.B.,6 where B.R. Gavai, J., writing for the bench, 
observed as follows: 
“16. It is a settled principle of law that extra-judicial 
confession is a weak piece of evidence. It has been 
held that where suspicious circumstances surround an 
extra-judicial confession, its credibility becomes doubtful 
and loses importance. It has further been held that 
it is well-settled that it is a rule of caution where the 
Court would generally look for an independent, reliable 
corroboration before placing any reliance upon such 
extra-judicial confession. It has been held that there is 
no doubt that conviction can be based on extra-judicial 
confession, but in the very nature of things, it is a weak 
piece of evidence.”
(Emphasis supplied)
26.	 The extra-judicial confession and the consequent recovery are also 
surrounded by suspicious circumstances. 
27.	 The first suspicion of this extra-judicial confession arises from different 
versions of where the confession took place. PW1 has deposed that 
the accused confessed his crime at the marriage hall. Meanwhile, 
PW2 has deposed that it was so done at the tube well. PW3 brings 
out a different version in her deposition by stating that the confession 
took place in the field near the tube well. PW3 changes the story in 
her cross-examination, stating that the confession was not witnessed 
by her. In the considered view of this Court, these are not minor 
contradictions that can be brushed off. There are three different 
versions of one confession, which does not inspire confidence in 
the testimony of these witnesses. 
28.	 Apart from the above contradiction, another circumstance which 
does not inspire confidence of the Court in the testimony of PW1, 
the Complainant and star witness of the prosecution, is that in his 
deposition, he stated that he had accompanied his family to the 
marriage hall. It directly contradicts the testimony of PW8, who 
6	
(2023) 6 SCC 605
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1803
Sanjay v. State of Uttar Pradesh
deposed that during the investigation when he had recorded the 
statement of PW1, such a fact was not disclosed.
29.	 The most pertinent suspicion in the prosecution case is that no 
single independent witness is adjoined or examined in support of the 
confession or consequent recovery. We must clarify that this is not 
a case where the Investigating Officer tried to adjoin independent 
witnesses, but it was refused. PW1, in his statement categorically 
states that a large public from the village had gathered when the 
accused led them to the spot where the body of the deceased 
was recovered. The investigating officer, PW8, himself deposed 
that ‘some other people’ were present during the recovery. No 
explanation is provided for their non-joining, more so when the 
entire prosecution case rests on this circumstance. The recovery 
of the body of the deceased is from a field which is accessible and 
open to the public, which further warrants need for an independent 
witness. 
30.	 Given the availability of independent witnesses in this case, the 
investigating officer has deliberated to exclude them. PW1, in his 
testimony, also mentions that his father, Ramchandra, and one 
Rameshwar had also witnessed the confession of the accused. 
The prosecution has also not examined these two persons. This is 
a glaring omission in the attending facts and circumstances. 
31.	 We are now considering the report of the Assistant Director, Forensic 
Lab, Agra. This report has miserably failed to link the accused with 
the crime. The examination conducted only verifies whether the 
blood found is of human origin, and that semen was present on the 
underwear allegedly belonging to the deceased. There is no testing 
undertaken to compare the blood found on the clothes of the deceased 
with the blood of the accused-appellant. How does signs of semen 
found on the clothes of the accused link him to the crime of either 
rape or murder. It is not the proven case of the prosecution that the 
semen of the accused was found on any part of the body or clothes 
of the deceased or for that matter, blood of the deceased found on 
the clothes of the accused. Alleged recovery of a button of a shirt 
does not link the accused to the crime in any manner. Cumulatively, 
therefore, the contents of this report do not point towards the guilt of 
the accused and fail to substantiate the conviction of the accused-
appellant under Section 376 IPC. 
1804
Supreme Court Reports
32.	 The only circumstance remaining against the accused that can 
be believed, is the last-seen theory. PW1, PW2, PW3 and PW6 
and PW7 have deposed that they saw the accused lastly with the 
deceased. It is settled law, however, that conviction cannot be solely 
based on last-seen theory. This Court in Krishnan v. State of T.N.7 
had observed :
“21. The conviction cannot be based only on the 
circumstance of last seen together with the deceased. In 
Arjun Marik v. State of Bihar [1994 Supp (2) SCC 372 : 
1994 SCC (Cri) 1551] this Court held as follows: (SCC 
p. 385, para 31)
“31. Thus the evidence that the Appellant had 
gone to Sitaram in the evening of 19-7-1985 and 
had stayed in the night at the house of deceased 
Sitaram is very shaky and inconclusive. Even 
if it is accepted that they were there it would 
at best amount to be the evidence of the 
appellants having been seen last together with 
the deceased. But it is settled law that the only 
circumstance of last seen will not complete the 
chain of circumstances to record the finding that 
it is consistent only with the hypothesis of the 
guilt of the accused and, therefore, no conviction 
on that basis alone can be founded.”
24. In Jaswant Gir v. State of Punjab [(2005) 12 SCC 
438 : (2006) 1 SCC (Cri) 579] this Court held that in the 
absence of any other links in the chain of circumstantial 
evidence, the Appellant cannot be convicted solely based 
on “last seen together” even if version of the prosecution 
witness in this regard is believed.”
(Emphasis supplied)
33.	 We must also clarify that even the last-seen theory against the 
accused-appellant is not free from suspicion. In her cross-examination, 
PW7, an independent witness, who has been relied upon for this 
7	
(2014) 12 SCC 279
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
1805
Sanjay v. State of Uttar Pradesh
circumstance, admits that she had not told the I.O.-PW8, on the first 
instance, that she had seen the accused leaving the marriage hall 
with the deceased. The reason for this omission at the first instance 
remains unexplained. 
34.	 This Court is of the view that the circumstances presented before us 
do not establish conclusively the guilt of the accused in committing 
the murder and rape of ‘X’. 
35.	 We deem it appropriate to reiterate what came to be observed by this 
Court in Randeep Singh v. State of Haryana,8 that a conviction can 
only be made when guilt is established beyond reasonable doubt, 
and as such, there cannot be a moral conviction in law. Though the 
offence in question strikes at the human conscience, there being 
a murder of a four-year-old girl child, the evidence brought by the 
prosecution is not clear and unimpeachable, pointing towards the 
guilt of the accused alone, meeting with the principles enunciated by 
this Court in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra.9
36.	 Therefore, in view of the above, the conviction of the accused-
appellant under Sections 302 and 376 of the IPC is set aside. The 
impugned order dated 26th July, 2005 passed by the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Appeal No. 4911 of 2004 & 
Reference No.15, which confirmed the judgment and order dated 
21st September, 2004 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Fast 
Track Court No.16, Bulandshahar in Sessions Case No.306/2004 
is quashed and set aside. The accused-appellant is directed to be 
released forthwith, if not required in another detention order.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.**
†Headnotes prepared by: Mukund P Unny, Hony. Associate Editor 
(Verified by: Abhinav Mukerji, Sr. Adv.)
8	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 3383
9	
(1984) 4 SCC 116
** Note: On 6th February 2005 itself, Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 224 of 2019 in the matter of Sanjay v. Union 
of India was dismissed by this Hon’ble Bench.