[2025] 9 S.C.R. 339 : 2025 INSC 1059
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. 
v. 
Suresh Chand and Anr.
(Civil Appeal No. 6377 of 2012)
01 September 2025
[Aravind Kumar* and Sandeep Mehta, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
I) Whether the impugned documents, i.e., Agreement to Sell, 
General Power of Attorney, Receipt of Consideration and the 
registered Will, allegedly entered into by K, father of the appellant/
defendant no.1 and respondent no.1/plaintiff in favour of the plaintiff 
would confer a valid title over the suit property; II) Whether the 
plaintiff can claim any benefit u/s.53A of TP Act, which deals with 
Part Performance.
Headnotes†
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 – s.54 – Succession Act, 1925 – 
s.63 – Evidence Act, 1872 – s.68 – Respondent no.1/plaintiff 
filed suit no. 613/1997 for possession, mesne profit, declaration, 
mandatory injunction against the appellant/defendant no. 1 and 
respondent no.2/defendant no.2 – The plaintiff claims that he 
had acquired title to the suit property from his father by virtue 
of a Agreement to sell, General Power of Attorney, Registered 
Will and Receipt of Consideration – It was further claimed 
that in order to gain wrongfully, the defendant no.1 sold half 
the portion of the suit property to the defendant no.2 – The 
Trial Court decreed the suit in favour of the respondent no.1/
plaintiff – In an appeal, the High Court upheld the decision 
of the Trial Court and dismissed the appellant’s appeal – 
Thereafter, the Civil Appeal No. 9012/2011 came to be filed 
before this Court assailing the said dismissal by the High 
Court – Vide order dated 31.10.2011 this court remanded the 
matter back to the High Court for fresh consideration – Matter 
was restored in the High Court – However, the High Court by 
the impugned order dismissed it – Correctness:
Held: In the instant matter, undisputedly plaintiff claims that there 
is only an Agreement to sell, and there is no sale deed executed 
* Author
340
Supreme Court Reports
in his favour by the father – As per the settled position of law, this 
document does not confer a valid title on the plaintiff as it is not a 
deed of conveyance as per s.54 of the TP Act – As regards General 
Power of Attorney, the said GPA merely authorises the grantee to 
manage the affairs of the suit property, which includes the power 
to let out the property on rent, and create a mortgage of the same, 
etc. – However, it is silent on the aspect of conveyance – It does 
not confer a valid title on him with respect to the suit property – The 
third document relied upon by the plaintiff is registered Will, the 
same has to be proved in accordance with law – In the trial Court 
judgment, there is not an iota of discussion about the validity of 
the Will as contemplated u/s.63 of the Succession Act, 1925 and 
s.68 of the Evidence Act, 1872 and yet, the validity of the Will has 
been upheld – Even the High Court, while evaluating the validity of 
the Will, has gone on a different tangent and has erroneously held 
that the requirement of examining the attesting witnesses springs 
into action only in cases of disputes between legal heirs – Such an 
observation is quite contrary to law – Besides that, there are certain 
suspicious circumstance surrounding the will, in as much as the 
alleged propounder of the Will, K had four children and he granted 
the entire property to one of his children without any reasoning 
as to why other three children were excluded – Apart from from 
the aforementioned documents, there is also an affidavit dated 
16.05.1996 wherein K is said to have acknowledged receipt of full 
consideration for the sale of suit property – The said instruments 
do not confer a valid title upon the plaintiff because as per s.54 
of TP Act, only through a deed of conveyance can a title can be 
transferred and none of the other documents and recitals in the 
said affidavit are not proved by examining any other independent 
witnesses – Thus, the impugned judgment is set aside and suit of 
the plaintiff stands dismissed. [Paras 17, 22, 27, 28, 35]
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 – s.53-A – Whether the Plaintiff 
can claim any benefit u/s. 53A of TP Act, which deals with 
Part Performance:
Held: According to s.53A of the TP Act, where there is a contract 
to transfer any immovable property in writing and the transferee 
has in part performance of the contract taken the possession of the 
property or part thereof, then notwithstanding that the transfer has 
not been completed in the manner prescribed by law, the transferor 
will be debarred from taking the possession of the property –  
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
341
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. v. Suresh Chand and Anr.
A perusal of s.53A of TP Act, as well as the case law on point, it 
is forthcoming that one of the main ingredients for taking shelter 
u/s.53A is the factum of possession – In the instant matter, the 
very fact that plaintiff has filed the present suit for possession, 
along with other reliefs, shows that on the date of filing of the suit, 
plaintiff was not in possession of the entire suit property – Since 
there was no possession with the plaintiff, he cannot derive any 
benefit under the doctrine of part-possession. [Paras 30, 31]
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 – s.5 and s.54 – Sale of 
immovable property – Specific mode of execution of sale deed:
Held: In sale for an immovable property the value of which exceeds 
Rs.100/-, the three requirements of law are that the transfer of 
property of sale must take place through a validly executed sale 
deed, i.e., it must be in writing, properly attested and registered – 
Unless the sale deed is in writing, attested and registered, the 
transaction cannot be construed as sale, or in other words, the 
property will not be transferred. [Para 14]
Property Law – Difference between Sale Deed and Agreement 
for sale:
Held: There is a difference between a sale deed and an agreement 
for sale, or a contract for sale – A contract for sale of immovable 
property is a contract that a sale of such property shall take place 
on terms settled between the parties – While a sale is a transfer 
of ownership; a contract for sale is merely a document creating a 
right to obtain another document, namely a registered sale deed to 
complete the transaction of sale of an immovable property – s.54 
in its definition of sale does not include an agreement of sale and 
neither confers any proprietary rights in favour of the transferee 
nor by itself create any interest or charge in the property – If after 
entering into a contract for sale of property, the seller without any 
reasonable excuse avoids executing a sale deed, the buyer can 
proceed to file a suit for specific performance of the contract. 
[Para 15]
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 – Sale through General Power 
of Attorney:
Held: A power of attorney is a creation of an agency whereby the 
grantor authorizes the grantee to do the acts specified therein, 
342
Supreme Court Reports
on behalf of grantor, which when executed will be binding on the 
grantor as if done by him – It is revocable or terminable at any time 
unless it is made irrevocable in a manner known to law – A General 
Power of Attorney does not ipso facto constitute an instrument 
of transfer of an immovable property even where some clauses 
are introduced in it, holding it to be irrevocable or authorizing the 
attorney holder to effect sale of the immovable property on behalf 
of the grantor – It would not ipso facto change the character of the 
document transforming it into a conveyance deed – On facts, held 
that the GPA in question merely authorises the grantee to manage 
the affairs of the suit property, which includes the power to let out 
the property on rent, and create a mortgage of the same, etc – 
However, it is silent on the aspect of conveyance. [Paras 18, 22]
Case Law Cited
Suraj Lamp and Industries Private Limited (2) through Director v. 
State of Haryana and Another [2011] 11 SCR 848 : (2012) 1 SCC 
656; State of Rajasthan and Others v. Basant Nahata [2005] Supp. 
3 SCR 1 : (2005) 12 SCC 77; Mathai Samuel and Others v. Eapen 
Eapen (Dead) by Lrs. and Others [2012] 10 SCR 1098 : (2012) 
13 SCC 80; H. Venkatachala Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma and 
Others [1959] Supp. 1 SCR 426 : AIR 1959 SC 443; Meena 
Pradhan and Others v. Kamla Pradhan and Another (2023) 9 SCC 
734; Nathulal v. Phoolchand [1969] 3 SCR 120 : (1969) 3 SCC 
120 – relied on.
Books and Periodicals Cited
Dr. Poonam Pradhan Saxena, Property Law, Third Edition, 2017 
(Lexis Nexis)
List of Acts
Transfer of Property Act, 1882; Succession Act, 1925; Evidence 
Act, 1872.
List of Keywords
Suit; Possession; Mesne profit; Declaration; Mandatory injunction; 
General Power of Attorney; Will; Part performance; Conveyance; 
Sale deed; Agreement to sell; Transfer of ownership; Specific 
performance of the contract; Execution of sale deed; Mode of 
execution of sale deed.
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
343
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. v. Suresh Chand and Anr.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 6377 of 2012
From the Judgment and Order dated 09.04.2012 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in RFA No. 358 of 2000
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
S. Mahendran.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Mrs. Rekha Pandey, Shiv Prakash Pandey, Raghav Pandey, 
Ms. Gauri Pandey, Ms. Sharmishtha Chowdhury.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Aravind Kumar, J. 
1.	
Heard. 
2.	
The appellants are aggrieved by the judgment dated 9th April, 2012, 
passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi whereby the Regular 
First Appeal No. 358/2000 filed by them against the judgment 
and decree dated 11th May, 2000 came to be dismissed and the 
judgment and decree passed in Suit No. 613/1997 by the Additional 
District Judge, Delhi decreeing the suit for possession, mesne 
profits, declaration, mandatory injunction filed by the Respondent 
No. 1, who was the plaintiff, came to be confirmed, by dismissing 
the counterclaim for declaration filed by the Appellant has been 
affirmed. For convenience, the parties are referred as per their 
rank before the Trial Court.
FACTUAL MATRIX:
3.	
Facts necessary for adjudication of the controversy on hand are as 
follows:
4.	
The suit property bearing No. 563, at Ambedkar Basti near Balmiki 
Gate, Delhi - 110053 was originally owned by Shri. Kundan Lal, 
father of the Appellant/Defendant No. 1 and Respondent No. 1/
344
Supreme Court Reports
Plaintiff. The plaintiff claims that he had acquired title to the suit 
property from his father, Shri. Kundan Lal by virtue of a General 
Power of Attorney, Agreement to Sell, Affidavit, and a Receipt. He 
also claimed that his father had executed a registered Will dated 
16.05.1996 bequeathing the suit schedule property in his favour. 
He further claims that defendant No. 1 has been living in the suit 
property as a licensee and after purchase of the suit property by the 
plaintiff, the defendant No. 1 was residing in the suit property as a 
mere trespasser. He further claims that in order to gain wrongfully, 
the defendant No. 1 sold half the portion of the suit property to the 
defendant No. 2, who is the Respondent No. 2 before us. Hence, 
the plaintiff filed a suit against the defendant No.1 and defendant 
No. 2 for the recovery of possession, mesne profits, declaration 
of title and mandatory injunction directing the defendant No. 1 to 
handover the original documents to him. In response to the said 
claim of the plaintiff, the defendant No. 1 filed a written statement 
and also raised a counter claim, contending that the suit property 
was orally transferred to him by the father in July 1973. He further 
contended that the plaintiff had earlier filed OS No. 294/1996 wherein 
he admitted that the father, Shri Kundan Lal was the owner of the 
property. However, he withdrew the said suit on 06.06.1997. In the 
counter claim, defendant sought for declaration that the alleged 
documents i.e. Will, Agreement to Sell, GPA etc. in respect of the 
suit property by Lt. Sh. Kundan Lal, who expired on 10th April, 1997 
was null and void and not binding on him. 
5.	
The Ld. Addl. District Judge decreed the suit in favour of the 
plaintiff and dismissed the counter claim filed by the defendant 
No.1 on the ground that the property had been transferred by the 
Sh. Kundan Lal in favour of the plaintiff by upholding the validity 
of the documents. The defendant No.1 assailed the same by filing 
Regular First Appeal No. 358 / 2000 before the High Court of Delhi, 
which came to be dismissed by the High Court by relying upon the 
judgment of Asha M. Jain v. Canara Bank and Others 1 which 
was later on overruled by this court in Suraj Lamp and Industries 
Private Limited (2) through Director v. State of Haryana and 
1	
(2001) SCC OnLine Del 1157
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
345
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. v. Suresh Chand and Anr.
Another.2 Against the said dismissal, the defendant No.1 had filed 
Civil Appeal No. 9012/2011. 
6.	
Vide the order 31.10.2011 aforesaid civil appeal came to be allowed 
in part and the matter was remanded back to the High Court for fresh 
disposal with an observation that the Agreement to Sell / General 
Power of Attorney / Will Transactions are not ‘transfers’ or ‘sales’ 
and such transactions cannot be treated as transfers or conveyances 
as contemplated under Transfer of Property Act, 1882. Hence, RFA 
No.358/2000 came to be restored to the file of High Court which 
has been heard afresh, and by the impugned order, it came to be 
dismissed on 09.04.2012. Aggrieved by the same, the defendant 
no.1 is in appeal before us.
SUBMISSIONS
7.	
Mr. S.Mahendran, Learned Counsel for the defendant No.1 made 
the following submissions:
	•
That there is no title of ownership conferred merely on the basis 
of Agreement to Sell, GPA, Affidavit, Receipt, Will etc. without 
there being any possession thereof.
	•
That the original title deeds of suit schedule property are in 
possession of the defendant No.1.
	•
That the Will has not been proved in accordance with law.
	•
Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act is not attracted if 
the possession of the property is not delivered.
	•
That Will is not an instrument of sale under Section 54 of Transfer 
of Property Act. As per Section 54, immovable property can be 
sold by a registered instrument only.
	•
That the alleged Attesting Witnesses PW-3 and PW-4 could not 
prove the execution of the documents filed by the plaintiff such 
as GPA, Agreement to Sell, Receipt, Will as required by Section 
3 of Transfer of Property Act, Section 68 of Indian Evidence 
Act and Section 63 of Indian Succession Act.
2	
(2012) 1 SCC 656
346
Supreme Court Reports
	•
That the Courts below have failed to appreciate that in the 
previous suit which is OS No. 294/1996 the plaintiff himself 
admitted in his replication filed on 12.10.1996 that the father, 
Shri Kundan Lal is owner of the suit property. On the other hand 
the present suit is filed by falsely alleging that he had purchased 
the suit property from the father on 16.05.1996 which is much 
prior to the date of filing of the replication. 
	•
That the vital facts clearly reveal that the alleged documents 
pertaining to the suit property had been obtained by the plaintiff 
on misrepresentation.
	•
That ever since 1973, the defendant No.1 has been in 
continuous, uninterrupted possession and occupation of the 
suit property in his own right and during this period i.e. 1973 
to 1997, the father Shri Kundan Lal neither filed any ejectment 
proceedings nor served any notice for his eviction during his 
lifetime, who died on 10.04.1997.
8.	
The Respondent No.1 / Plaintiff who was duly served has not entered 
appearance and is proceeded ex-parte. 
9.	
Mrs. Rekha Pandey, Learned Counsel for Respondent No.2/ 
Defendant No. 2 has made the following submissions:
	•
That the defendant No. 2 has purchased 50% share of the suit 
property from the defendant No.1 / Ramesh Chand.
	•
That the High Court vide order dated 28.02.2011 in RFA 
No. 358/2000 as well as this Court vide interim order dated 
26.08.2013 in present appeal has protected the right of the 
Respondent no. 2 as he was a bona fide purchaser of the 
property and is in possession of the property.
	•
That this Court must protect the rights of Respondent No. 2.
10.	 Upon hearing the Learned Counsels appearing for the parties and 
on perusal of the material available on record, the following points 
would arise for our consideration:
I.	
Whether the impugned documents, i.e., Agreement to Sell, 
General Power of Attorney, Receipt of Consideration and the 
registered Will, allegedly entered into by Mr. Kundan Lal in favour 
of the Plaintiff would confer a valid title over the suit property?
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
347
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. v. Suresh Chand and Anr.
II.	
Whether the Plaintiff can claim any benefit under Section 53A 
of TP Act, which deals with Part Performance?
III.	
To what relief the parties would be entitled to?
FINDINGS:
RE: POINT NO.1
11.	 It is an undisputed factual position that plaintiff and defendant no. 
1 are brothers, and the suit property belongs to their father Lt. 
Sh. Kundan Lal. The plaintiff claimed title to the suit property by 
placing reliance upon four documents, i.e., agreement to sell dated 
16.05.1996, power of attorney dated 16.05.1996, affidavit dated 
16.05.1996, receipt dated 16.05.1996, and a registered Will dated 
16.05.1996. Admittedly, no sale deed was executed in favour of the 
plaintiff by his father. Hence, this court is called upon to see whether 
these documents confer a valid title on him. In order to ascertain the 
same, it is essential for us to expound on the position of law with 
respect to the same. 
Agreement of Sale
12.	 The Transfer of immovable property inter vivos is governed by the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (hereinafter referred to as “the TP Act”). 
Section 5 of the said TP Act defines “transfer of property” as follows:
“5. ‘Transfer of property’ defined. —In the following 
sections ‘transfer of property’ means an act by which a living 
person conveys property, in present or in future, to one or 
more other living persons, or to himself or to himself and 
one or more other living persons and ‘to transfer property’ 
is to perform such act.”
13.	 The TP Act envisages five different modes for transferring a property 
but for the purpose of the present appeal we are only concerned 
with one of the modes i.e., by way of “Sale” and the same is dealt 
under section 54 of the TP Act which defines “sale” and a “contract 
for sale” as follows:
“54. ‘Sale’ defined. — ‘Sale’ is a transfer of ownership in 
exchange for a price paid or promised or part-paid and 
part-promised.
348
Supreme Court Reports
Sale how made. —Such transfer, in the case of tangible 
immovable property of the value of one hundred rupees and 
upwards, or in the case of a reversion or other intangible 
thing, can be made only by a registered instrument.
In the case of tangible immovable property of a value less 
than one hundred rupees, such transfer may be made either 
by a registered instrument or by delivery of the property.
Delivery of tangible immovable property takes place when 
the seller places the buyer, or such person as he directs, 
in possession of the property.
Contract for sale. —A contract for the sale of immovable 
property is a contract that a sale of such property shall 
take place on terms settled between the parties.
It does not, of itself, create any interest in or charge on 
such property.”
14.	 Perusal of above said provisions lays down a specific mode of 
execution of sale deed with respect to immovable property for 
concluding the sale of a property. In sale for an immovable property 
the value of which exceeds Rs. 100/-, the three requirements of law 
are that the transfer of property of sale must take place through 
a validly executed sale deed, i.e., it must be in writing, properly 
attested and registered. Unless the sale deed is in writing, attested 
and registered, the transaction cannot be construed as sale, or in 
other words, the property will not be transferred. 
15.	 There is a difference between a sale deed and an agreement for 
sale, or a contract for sale. A contract for sale of immovable property 
is a contract that a sale of such property shall take place on terms 
settled between the parties. While a sale is a transfer of ownership; 
a contract for sale is merely a document creating a right to obtain 
another document, namely a registered sale deed to complete 
the transaction of sale of an immovable property. Section 54 in its 
definition of sale does not include an agreement of sale and neither 
confers any proprietary rights in favour of the transferee nor by itself 
create any interest or charge in the property. If after entering into 
a contract for sale of property, the seller without any reasonable 
excuse avoids executing a sale deed, the buyer can proceed to file 
a suit for specific performance of the contract.
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
349
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. v. Suresh Chand and Anr.
16.	 The scope of an agreement for sale has been highlighted by this 
court in the case of Suraj Lamp and Industries Private Limited 
(2) through Director v. State of Haryana and Another3, wherein 
this Court observed that
“16. Section 54 of the TP Act makes it clear that a contract 
of sale, that is, an agreement of sale does not, of itself, 
create any interest in or charge on such property. This 
Court in Narandas Karsondas v. S.A. Kamtam [(1977) 3 
SCC 247] observed: 
“32. A contract of sale does not of itself create 
any interest in, or charge on, the property. This is 
expressly declared in Section 54 of the Transfer 
of Property Act. (See Ram Baran Prasad v. Ram 
Mohit Hazra [AIR 1967 SC 744]). The fiduciary 
character of the personal obligation created by 
a contract for sale is recognised in Section 3 
of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, and in Section 
91 of the Trusts Act. The personal obligation 
created by a contract of sale is described in 
Section 40 of the Transfer of Property Act as an 
obligation arising out of contract and annexed 
to the ownership of property, but not amounting 
to an interest or easement therein.
33. In India, the word ‘transfer’ is defined with 
reference to the word ‘convey’. … The word 
‘conveys’ in Section 5 of the Transfer of Property 
Act is used in the wider sense of conveying 
ownership.
***
37. … that only on execution of conveyance, 
ownership passes from one party to another….”
17. In Rambhau Namdeo Gajre v. Narayan Bapuji Dhotra 
[(2004) 8 SCC 614] this Court held: 
3	
(2012) 1 SCC 656
350
Supreme Court Reports
“10. Protection provided under Section 53-A of 
the Act to the proposed transferee is a shield 
only against the transferor. It disentitles the 
transferor from disturbing the possession of the 
proposed transferee who is put in possession 
in pursuance to such an agreement. It has 
nothing to do with the ownership of the proposed 
transferor who remains full owner of the 
property till it is legally conveyed by executing a 
registered sale deed in favour of the transferee. 
Such a right to protect possession against the 
proposed vendor cannot be pressed into service 
against a third party.”
18. It is thus clear that a transfer of immovable property 
by way of sale can only be by a deed of conveyance 
(sale deed). In the absence of a deed of conveyance 
(duly stamped and registered as required by law), no 
right, title or interest in an immovable property can be 
transferred.
19. Any contract of sale (agreement to sell) which is not 
a registered deed of conveyance (deed of sale) would fall 
short of the requirements of Sections 54 and 55 of the TP 
Act and will not confer any title nor transfer any interest in 
an immovable property (except to the limited right granted 
under Section 53-A of the TP Act). According to the TP 
Act, an agreement of sale, whether with possession or 
without possession, is not a conveyance. Section 54 of 
the TP Act enacts that sale of immovable property can be 
made only by a registered instrument and an agreement 
of sale does not create any interest or charge on its 
subject-matter.”
17.	 In the instant matter, undisputedly plaintiff claims that there is only an 
agreement to sell, and there is no sale deed executed in his favour by 
the father. As per the settled position of law, this document does not 
confer a valid title on the plaintiff as it is not a deed of conveyance 
as per Section 54 of the TP Act. At best, it only enables the plaintiff 
to seek for specific performance for the execution of a sale deed and 
does not create an interest or charge on the suit property.
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
351
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. v. Suresh Chand and Anr.
General Power of Attorney
18.	 A power of attorney is a creation of an agency whereby the grantor 
authorizes the grantee to do the acts specified therein, on behalf 
of grantor, which when executed will be binding on the grantor as 
if done by him. It is revocable or terminable at any time unless it is 
made irrevocable in a manner known to law. A General Power of 
Attorney does not ipso facto constitute an instrument of transfer of 
an immovable property even where some clauses are introduced in 
it, holding it to be irrevocable or authorizing the attorney holder to 
effect sale of the immovable property on behalf of the grantor. It would 
not ipso facto change the character of the document transforming it 
into a conveyance deed.4 
19.	 A power of attorney is not a sale. A sale involves transfer of all 
the rights in the property in favour of the transferee but a power of 
attorney simply authorises the grantee to do certain acts with respect 
to the property including if the grantor permits to do certain acts with 
respect to the property including an authority to sell the property.5
20.	 In the case of State of Rajasthan and Others v. Basant Nahata,6 
it was held that:
“13. A grant of power of attorney is essentially governed 
by Chapter X of the Contract Act. By reason of a deed of 
power of attorney, an agent is formally appointed to act for 
the principal in one transaction or a series of transactions 
or to manage the affairs of the principal generally conferring 
necessary authority upon another person. A deed of power 
of attorney is executed by the principal in favour of the 
agent. The agent derives a right to use his name and all 
acts, deeds and things done by him and subject to the 
limitations contained in the said deed, the same shall be 
read as if done by the donor. A power of attorney is, as 
is well known, a document of convenience.
xxxx
4	
Dr. Poonam Pradhan Saxena, Property Law, Third Edition, 2017 (Lexis Nexis), p. 66
5	
Dr. Poonam Pradhan Saxena, Property Law, Third Edition, 2017 (Lexis Nexis), p. 301
6	
(2005) 12 SCC 77
352
Supreme Court Reports
52. Execution of a power of attorney in terms of the 
provisions of the Contract Act as also the Powers of 
Attorney Act is valid. A power of attorney, we have noticed 
hereinbefore, is executed by the donor so as to enable 
the donee to act on his behalf. Except in cases where 
power of attorney is coupled with interest, it is revocable. 
The donee in exercise of his power under such power of 
attorney only acts in place of the donor subject of course 
to the powers granted to him by reason thereof. He cannot 
use the power of attorney for his own benefit. He acts in 
a fiduciary capacity. Any act of infidelity or breach of trust 
is a matter between the donor and the donee.”
21.	 Further, the position of a power of attorney with respect to conferment 
of title was explained by this Court in the case of Suraj Lamp 
(supra), thus:
“20. A power of attorney is not an instrument of transfer 
in regard to any right, title or interest in an immovable 
property. The power of attorney is creation of an agency 
whereby the grantor authorises the grantee to do the 
acts specified therein, on behalf of grantor, which when 
executed will be binding on the grantor as if done by him 
(see Section 1-A and Section 2 of the Powers of Attorney 
Act, 1882). It is revocable or terminable at any time unless 
it is made irrevocable in a manner known to law. Even an 
irrevocable attorney does not have the effect of transferring 
title to the grantee.”
22.	 Having discussed the position of law, it is essential to peruse the 
recitals of the General Power of Attorney, which is on record and 
pressed into service by plaintiff. The said GPA merely authorises the 
grantee to manage the affairs of the suit property, which includes 
the power to let out the property on rent, and create a mortgage of 
the same, etc. However, it is silent on the aspect of conveyance. Be 
that as it may. The recitals of the power of attorney would indicate 
the intent of the grantor is to limit the powers of the grantee to 
only manage the suit property, and not to create any interest in his 
favour, which is in consonance with the settled position of law as 
discussed above that a power of attorney is an agency by which the 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
353
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. v. Suresh Chand and Anr.
agent derives the authority or the right to enter into transactions on 
behalf of the principal. Even if we accept the validity of the Power 
of Attorney in favour of the plaintiff, still it does not confer a valid 
title on him with respect to the suit property.
Will
23.	 The third document that the plaintiff has relied upon to claim his title 
over the property is a Registered Will dated 16.05.1996 said to have 
been executed by his father. The term “Will” has been defined under 
Section 2(h) of the Succession Act, 1925 as “the legal declaration of 
a testator with respect to his property which he desires to be carried 
into effect after his death”. Its essentials have been further enumerated 
by this Court in the case of Mathai Samuel and Others v. Eapen 
Eapen (Dead) by Lrs. And Others7 thus:
“12. Will is an instrument whereunder a person makes a 
disposition of his properties to take effect after his death 
and which is in its own nature ambulatory and revocable 
during his lifetime. It has three essentials:
(1) It must be a legal declaration of the testator’s intention;
(2) That declaration must be with respect to his property; 
and
(3) The desire of the testator that the said declaration 
should be effectuated after his death.
13. The essential quality of a testamentary disposition 
is ambulatoriness of revocability during the executant’s 
lifetime. Such a document is dependent upon the 
executant’s death for its vigour and effect.”
24.	 Will has also been expounded upon in the case of Suraj Lamp 
(supra), thus:
“22. A will is the testament of the testator. It is a posthumous 
disposition of the estate of the testator directing distribution 
of his estate upon his death. It is not a transfer inter vivos. 
The two essential characteristics of a will are that it is 
7	
(2012) 13 SCC 80 
354
Supreme Court Reports
intended to come into effect only after the death of the 
testator and is revocable at any time during the lifetime of 
the testator. It is said that so long as the testator is alive, 
a will is not worth the paper on which it is written, as the 
testator can at any time revoke it. If the testator, who is 
not married, marries after making the will, by operation 
of law, the will stands revoked. Registration of a will does 
not make it any more effective.”
25.	 This Court on the issue of the proof of Wills in the case of 
H. Venkatachala Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma and Others8 has 
succinctly defined the contours as under:
“18. What is the true legal position in the matter of proof 
of wills? It is well-known that the proof of wills presents 
a recurring topic for decision in courts and there are a 
large number of judicial pronouncements on the subject. 
The party propounding a will or otherwise making a claim 
under a will is no doubt seeking to prove a document and, 
in deciding how it is to be proved, we must inevitably 
refer to the statutory provisions which govern the proof of 
documents. Sections 67 and 68 of the Evidence Act are 
relevant for this purpose. Under Section 67, if a document 
is alleged to be signed by any person, the signature of 
the said person must be proved to be in his handwriting, 
and for proving such a handwriting under Sections 45 
and 47 of the Act the opinions of experts and of persons 
acquainted with the handwriting of the person concerned 
are made relevant. Section 68 deals with the proof of the 
execution of the document required by law to be attested; 
and it provides that such a document shall not be used as 
evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called 
for the purpose of proving its execution. These provisions 
prescribe the requirements and the nature of proof which 
must be satisfied by the party who relies on a document in 
a court of law. Similarly, Sections 59 and 63 of the Indian 
Succession Act are also relevant. Section 59 provides 
that every person of sound mind, not being a minor, may 
8	
AIR 1959 SC 443
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
355
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. v. Suresh Chand and Anr.
dispose of his property by will and the three illustrations 
to this section indicate what is meant by the expression “a 
person of sound mind” in the context. Section 63 requires 
that the testator shall sign or affix his mark to the will or it 
shall be signed by some other person in his presence and 
by his direction and that the signature or mark shall be so 
made that it shall appear that it was intended thereby to 
give effect to the writing as a will. This section also requires 
that the will shall be attested by two or more witnesses as 
prescribed. Thus the question as to whether the will set 
up by the propounder is proved to be the last will of the 
testator has to be decided in the light of these provisions. 
Has the testator signed the will? Did he understand the 
nature and effect of the dispositions in the will? Did he 
put his signature to the will knowing what it contained? 
Stated broadly it is the decision of these questions which 
determines the nature of the finding on the question of 
the proof of wills. It would prima facie be true to say that 
the will has to be proved like any other document except 
as to the special requirements of attestation prescribed 
by Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act. As in the 
case of proof of other documents so in the case of proof 
of wills it would be idle to expect proof with mathematical 
certainty. The test to be applied would be the usual test 
of the satisfaction of the prudent mind in such matters.”
26.	 Further, in the case of Meena Pradhan and Others v. Kamla Pradhan 
and Another9 following essentials to prove a Will were mentioned:
“10.1. The court has to consider two aspects : firstly, that 
the will is executed by the testator, and secondly, that it 
was the last will executed by him;
10.2. It is not required to be proved with mathematical 
accuracy, but the test of satisfaction of the prudent mind 
has to be applied.
10.3. A will is required to fulfil all the formalities required 
under Section 63 of the Succession Act, that is to say:
9	
(2023) 9 SCC 734 
356
Supreme Court Reports
(a) The testator shall sign or affix his mark to the 
will or it shall be signed by some other person in 
his presence and by his direction and the said 
signature or affixation shall show that it was 
intended to give effect to the writing as a will;
(b) It is mandatory to get it attested by two or 
more witnesses, though no particular form of 
attestation is necessary;
(c) Each of the attesting witnesses must have 
seen the testator sign or affix his mark to the 
will or has seen some other person sign the 
will, in the presence and by the direction of the 
testator, or has received from the testator a 
personal acknowledgment of such signatures;
(d) Each of the attesting witnesses shall sign 
the will in the presence of the testator, however, 
the presence of all witnesses at the same time 
is not required;
10.4. For the purpose of proving the execution of the will, 
at least one of the attesting witnesses, who is alive, subject 
to the process of court, and capable of giving evidence, 
shall be examined;
10.5. The attesting witness should speak not only about 
the testator’s signatures but also that each of the witnesses 
had signed the will in the presence of the testator;
10.6. If one attesting witness can prove the execution of 
the will, the examination of other attesting witnesses can 
be dispensed with;
10.7. Where one attesting witness examined to prove 
the will fails to prove its due execution, then the other 
available attesting witness has to be called to supplement 
his evidence.
10.8. Whenever there exists any suspicion as to the 
execution of the will, it is the responsibility of the propounder 
to remove all legitimate suspicions before it can be 
accepted as the testator’s last will. In such cases, the 
initial onus on the propounder becomes heavier.
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
357
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. v. Suresh Chand and Anr.
10.9. The test of judicial conscience has been evolved for 
dealing with those cases where the execution of the will 
is surrounded by suspicious circumstances. It requires 
to consider factors such as awareness of the testator as 
to the content as well as the consequences, nature and 
effect of the dispositions in the will; sound, certain and 
disposing state of mind and memory of the testator at the 
time of execution; testator executed the will while acting 
on his own free will;
10.10. One who alleges fraud, fabrication, undue influence 
et cetera has to prove the same. However, even in the 
absence of such allegations, if there are circumstances 
giving rise to doubt, then it becomes the duty of the 
propounder to dispel such suspicious circumstances by 
giving a cogent and convincing explanation.
10.11. Suspicious circumstances must be “real, germane 
and valid” and not merely “the fantasy of the doubting mind 
[Shivakumar v. Sharanabasappa, (2021) 11 SCC 277] ”. 
Whether a particular feature would qualify as “suspicious” 
would depend on the facts and circumstances of each 
case. Any circumstance raising suspicion legitimate in 
nature would qualify as a suspicious circumstance, for 
example, a shaky signature, a feeble mind, an unfair and 
unjust disposition of property, the propounder himself taking 
a leading part in the making of the will under which he 
receives a substantial benefit, etc.”
27.	 Considering the aforementioned cases, it is clear that in order to 
rely upon a Will, the same has to be proved in accordance with 
law. A Will has to be attested by two witnesses, and either of the 
two attesting witnesses have to be examined by the propounder 
of the will. In the present matter, we have carefully perused the 
Trial Court’s judgment. There is not an iota of discussion about 
the validity of the Will as contemplated under Section 63 of the 
Succession Act, 1925 and Section 68 of the Evidence Act, 1872 
and yet, the validity of the Will has been upheld. This is contrary 
to law. Even the High Court, while evaluating the validity of the 
Will, has gone on a different tangent and has erroneously held 
that the requirement of examining the attesting witnesses springs 
into action only in cases of disputes between legal heirs. Such an 
358
Supreme Court Reports
observation is quite contrary to law, for Section 68 of the Evidence 
Act makes it mandatory to examine at least one of the attesting 
witnesses of the Will. Mere fact that the Will was registered will not 
grant validity to the document. Besides that, the will propounded by 
plaintiff is surrounded with suspicious circumstances, in as much 
as the alleged propounder of the Will, Lt. Sh. Kundan Lal, had four 
children, including the plaintiff and the defendant No. 1. There is 
not even a whisper of reasoning as to why the propounder of the 
Will choose to exclude other three children from the bequest, and 
whether any other properties or assets were given to them. It is 
highly unlikely that a father would grant his entire property to one 
of his children, at the cost of three others, without there being any 
evidence of estrangement between the father and the children. 
This suspicious circumstance surrounding the will has not been 
removed by the plaintiff either. Hence, for these cumulative reasons, 
the Will propounded by plaintiff though registered would not confer 
any valid title on the plaintiff either.
Receipt of Consideration / Affidavit
28.	 Apart from the aforementioned documents, there is also an affidavit 
dated 16.05.1996 said to have been executed by Sh. Kundan Lal in 
favour of the plaintiff, along with a receipt of consideration, wherein Sh. 
Kundan Lal is said to have acknowledged receipt of full consideration 
for the sale of suit property to the tune of Rs. 1,40,000/- from the 
Plaintiff. The said instruments do not confer a valid title upon the 
plaintiff because as per Section 54 of TP Act, only through a deed 
of conveyance can a title can be transferred, and none of the 
other documents and recitals in the said affidavit are not proved by 
examining any other independent witnesses.
	•
RE: POINT NO.2
29.	 The plaintiff also lays claim to the property by virtue of Section 53A 
of the TP Act. Section 53-A of the TP Act defines “part-performance” 
as follows:
“53-A. Part performance. —Where any person contracts 
to transfer for consideration any immovable property by 
writing signed by him or on his behalf from which the terms 
necessary to constitute the transfer can be ascertained 
with reasonable certainty:
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
359
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. v. Suresh Chand and Anr.
and the transferee has, in part performance of the contract, 
taken possession of the property or any part thereof, or 
the transferee, being already in possession, continues in 
possession in part performance of the contract and has 
done some act in furtherance of the contract,
and the transferee has performed or is willing to perform 
his part of the contract,
then, notwithstanding that, where there is an instrument of 
transfer, that the transfer has not been completed in the 
manner prescribed therefor by the law for the time being 
in force, the transferor or any person claiming under him 
shall be debarred from enforcing against the transferee 
and persons claiming under him any right in respect of the 
property of which the transferee has taken or continued in 
possession, other than a right expressly provided by the 
terms of the contract:
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the rights 
of a transferee for consideration who has no notice of the 
contract or of the part performance thereof.”
30.	 According to Section 53A of the TP Act, where there is a contract to 
transfer any immovable property in writing and the transferee has in 
part performance of the contract taken the possession of the property 
or part thereof, then notwithstanding that the transfer has not been 
completed in the manner prescribed by law, the transferor will be 
debarred from taking the possession of the property. The essential 
conditions for invoking the doctrine of part-performance as envisaged 
u/s 53A of TP Act have been enunciated by this Court in the case 
of Nathulal v. Phoolchand10 thus:
“9. The conditions necessary for making out the defence of 
part performance to an action in ejectment by the owner are:
(1) that the transferor has contracted to transfer for 
consideration any immovable property by writing signed 
by him or on his behalf from which the terms necessary to 
constitute the transfer can be ascertained with reasonable 
certainty;
10	
(1969) 3 SCC 120
360
Supreme Court Reports
(2) that the transferee, has, in part performance of the 
contract, taken possession of the property or any part 
thereof, or the transferee, being already in possession 
continues in possession in part performance of the contract;
(3) that the transferee has done some act in furtherance 
of the contract; and
(4) that the transferee has performed or is willing to perform 
his part of the contract.
If these conditions are fulfilled then notwithstanding that 
the contract, though required to be registered, has not 
been registered, or, where there is an instrument of 
transfer, that the transfer has not been completed in the 
manner prescribed therefor by the law for the time being 
in force, the transferor or any person claiming under him is 
debarred from enforcing against the transferee any right in 
respect of the property of which the transferee has taken 
or continued in possession, other than a right expressly 
provided by the terms of the contract.”
31.	 A perusal of Section 53A of TP Act, as well as the case law on point, 
it is forthcoming that one of the main ingredients for taking shelter 
under Section 53A is the factum of possession. Unless the transferee 
in the instrument of agreement to sale is able to prove that he has 
been in possession of the suit property, no benefit u/s 53A will be 
given. In the instant matter, the very fact that plaintiff has filed the 
present suit for possession, along with other reliefs, shows that on 
the date of filing of the suit, plaintiff was not in possession of the 
entire suit property. Since there was no possession with the plaintiff, 
he cannot derive any benefit under the doctrine of part-possession. 
	•
RE: POINT NO.3
32.	 Thus, the aforestated discussion would indicate that the property was 
originally owned by Shri Kundan Lal namely the father of plaintiff 
and defendant No.1 and on his demise the succession has opened 
up. The will dated 16.05.1996 propounded by the plaintiff having 
been held not proved and as such class-I legal heirs of deceased 
Shri Kundan Lal would be entitled to the share in the suit schedule 
property. 
[2025] 9 S.C.R. 
361
Ramesh Chand (D) Thr. Lrs. v. Suresh Chand and Anr.
33.	 In the instant case, the appellant herein has sold 50% of the suit 
property in favour of the second defendant. This Court by order 
dated 26.08.2013 had passed the following order:
“In view of the statement contained in para 11 of the 
impugned judgment as well as the operative portion thereof, 
interim order dated 05.09.2012 is modified and it is made 
clear that the same shall not prejudicially affect the rights 
of respondent No.2.”
34.	 In the light of the said order passed, we are of the considered view 
that the right of the second defendant would stand protected to the 
extent of the share of the appellant only and except reiterating to 
this effect contentions of all parties are kept open, and no opinion 
is expressed and they are at liberty to work out their rights if so 
advised in accordance with law.
35.	 In the light of the aforementioned discussion, the impugned judgment 
is set aside, and appeal is allowed, and suit of the plaintiff stands 
dismissed subject to the observations made herein above. We make 
no order as to costs. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand 
consigned to records. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan