[2025] 1 S.C.R. 362 : 2025 INSC 43
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das 
v. 
Union of India and Another
(Criminal Appeal No. 4229 of 2024)
08 January 2025
[M.M. Sundresh* and Aravind Kumar, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards plea of juvenility raised u/s.9(2) of the 
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
Headnotes†
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 – 
s.9(2) – Plea of juvenility – Appellant charged for the offence of 
culpable homicide amounting to murder, for incident occurred 
in 1994 – On recording of statements in 2001, the appellant 
stated his age as 20 years – After conviction, the appellant 
raised the plea of juvenility during the hearing on sentence 
that he was around 17 years at the time of occurrence – 
Trial court, relying upon his statement regarding the bank 
account, presumed that he was major and sentenced him to 
death – Upheld by the High Court as also Supreme Court – 
Review Petition thereagainst also dismissed – Mercy Petition 
before the Governor also rejected – Thereafter, Writ Petition  
u/Art.32 as also Curative Petition dismissed – Mercy Petition 
filed before Hon’ble the President of India – During the 
pendency, 2007 Rules came into effect – Ossification test done 
and the Medical Age Certificate indicated that the appellant 
was aged around 14 years at the time of the occurrence – By 
Presidential Order, death sentence of the appellant commuted 
to life imprisonment, with caveat that he shall not be released 
until the attainment of 60 years of age – Subsequent Curative 
Petition rejected – Appellant then filed Writ Petition before the 
High Court challenging the Presidential Order and also for 
seeking relief u/s.9(2) – Writ Petition dismissed holding that 
the power of judicial review over an executive order passed 
in exercise of Art. 72 is limited, and the proceedings against 
the appellant had attained finality – Challenge to:
* Author
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
363
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
Held: No dispute that the appellant was only 14 years old at 
the time of the commission of the offence – At every stage, 
injustice has been inflicted by the Courts, either by ignoring the 
documents or by casting a furtive glance – Appellant, despite 
being illiterate, raised this plea one way or another, right from the 
trial court up to the conclusion of the Curative Petition before this 
Court – Approach of the Courts in the earlier round of litigation 
cannot be sustained in the eye of law – Statement given by the 
appellant at the time of the hearing on his sentence, also pale 
into insignificance, as even then he would have been a minor at 
the time of commission of the offence, under both the 2000 and 
the 2015 Acts – Procedural mandate contemplated under the 
1986 Act not followed by the courts below – Curative petition 
dismissed without according any reason – Even the then existing 
State Rules not duly followed – When the plea of juvenility was 
raised, it should have been dealt with under the existing laws at 
the relevant point of time, especially when there exists a tacit 
and clear admission as to the age of the appellant – This Court 
could have dealt with the writ petition filed u/Art.32, as it raised 
independent prayer for the enforcement of a right conferred under 
a social welfare legislation – In the subsequent writ petition filed 
before the High Court, two different prayer made, the determination 
of the appellant’s plea of juvenility and consequent release, or 
alternatively judicial review of the decision of the President or 
the Governor and consequent release – Executive cannot be 
construed to have undertaken an adjudication on the determination 
of the age of the accused and first prayer being a distinct one 
invoking s.9(2), the High Court erred in its reasoning – Appellant 
has been suffering due to the error committed by the Courts – 
His conduct in the prison is normal, with no adverse report – He 
lost an opportunity to reintegrate into the society – Time which 
he has lost, for no fault of his, can never be restored – Thus, 
the sentence imposed in excess of the upper limit prescribed 
under the relevant Act set aside, while maintaining the conviction 
rendered – It is not a review of the Presidential Order, but a case 
of giving the benefit of the provisions of the 2015 Act – State Legal 
Services Authority to identify welfare scheme of the State/Central 
Government, facilitating the appellant’s rehabilitation and smooth 
reintegration into the society upon his release, with emphasis 
on his right to livelihood, shelter and sustenance guaranteed  
u/Art.21. [Paras 44-54]
364
Justice delivery system – Concept of truth – Duty of Court – 
Explanation:
Held: Justice is nothing but a manifestation of the truth, which 
transcends every other action – Primary duty of the Court is to make 
a single-minded endeavour to unearth the truth hidden beneath 
the facts – Court is a search engine of truth, with procedural and 
substantive laws as its tools – When procedural law stands in the 
way of the truth, the Court must find a way to circumvent it – When 
substantive law does not facilitate the emergence of the truth, it 
is the paramount duty of the Court to interpret the law in light of 
its teleos – Such exercise warranted in a higher degree, while 
considering a social welfare legislation – Court must discern the 
truth, primarily from the material available on record in the form of 
pleadings, and arguments duly supported by documents – Entire 
judicial system meant for the discovery of the truth, it being the 
soul of a decision – Presiding Officer expected to play an active 
role, rather than a passive one. [Paras 4-6]
Juvenility – Juvenile justice – Rights of juvenile – Role of 
juvenile courts and Constitutional Courts:
Held: Deviant behaviour of a child in conflict with law should 
be a concern of the society as a whole – Child not responsible 
for an act of crime, but rather victimized by it – Behaviour of a 
child can be attributed to environment, the child grows in, and 
genetics – Remedial measures may be employed for the benefit 
of the child since the child does not choose the environment in 
which it grows, deviant behaviour which is a result of exposure to 
a given environment is evidence of rampant inequality – Thus, a 
child who lives in a discriminatory environment, requires equitable 
treatment on the touchstone of Arts. 14, 15(3) rw Art. 39 (e) and (f), 
Arts. 45 and 47 – Court expected to play the role of parens patriae 
by treating a child not as a delinquent, but as a victim, viewed 
through the lens of reformation, rehabilitation and reintegration into 
the society – Juvenile Court is a species of a parent – Delinquent, 
who appears before the Court, is to be protected and re-educated, 
rather than be judged and punished – Court to press into service 
the benevolent provisions for rehabilitation introduced by the 
Legislature – Juvenile Court assumes the role of an institution 
rendering psychological services – Juvenile Court must don the 
robes of a correction home for a deviant child – Furthermore, 
since the need for taking care of a juvenile in conflict with law is 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
365
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
mandated by the Constitution, the role of the constitutional Courts 
is significant – Even after the dismissal of a Special Leave Petition/
Statutory Criminal Appeal followed by incidental proceedings before 
Supreme Court, where the plea of juvenility was not consciously 
considered, there would be no bar on the constitutional Courts 
to consciously take a deeper look – It is not an exercise of the 
powers conferred u/Arts 32, 136 or 226, but an act in fulfilment of 
a mandated duty enjoined upon the Courts, to give effect to the 
laudable objective of a social welfare legislation – Constitution of 
India, 1950 – Arts. 14, 15(3), 39(e), 39(f), 45, 47. [Paras 8-11, 23]
Juvenile Justice (Care And Protection Of Children) Act, 
2015 – s.9(2) – Special homes – Plea of juvenility vis-à-vis 
final disposal – Words “even after the final disposal of the 
case” in s.9(2) – Significance:
Held: s. 9(2) being the heart and soul of the entire Act, must 
be given its fullest meaning and interpretation – If the offence 
is committed by a child, it cannot be treated otherwise than as 
provided under the 2015 Act – After finding out the truth, necessary 
consequences must follow – Sufficient opportunities must be given 
to the child in conflict with law to get the benefit of the 2015 Act – 
Merely because a casual adjudication has taken place does not 
mean that a plea of juvenility cannot be raised subsequently – So 
long as the right of a party subsists, one can never say that finality 
has been attained – In a case where a plea has been raised, but 
not adjudicated upon, the decision rendered thereunder would not 
amount to attaining finality – In a case where the plea was not 
treated as an application u/s.9(2) and, the procedure mandated 
thereunder was not followed, the principle stated would apply as 
right of raising the plea of juvenility has not ceased and, thus, 
subsists. [Paras 21-22]
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 
2007 – r.12, 12(3) – Procedure to be followed in determination 
of age – Hierarchy of documents:
Held: While there is no difficulty in the application of the principal 
Act inclusive of the procedural part, even for a juvenile in conflict 
with law who has attained majority on or after 2001, r.12 must 
be applied retrospectively even to those cases, especially where 
no exercise was undertaken under any of the State Rules or the 
erstwhile Acts, on earlier occasions – Sub-rule (3) of r.12 is a rule 
366
of evidence, which merely provides a hierarchy of documents in 
the order of priority, to be taken note of and considered while 
determining the age of a juvenile in conflict with law, in an ongoing 
inquiry – Where a matriculation certificate is very much available, 
a date of birth certificate from the school or a birth certificate given 
by a local authority shall never be looked into – Only if none of the 
said documents is available, can one go for a medical opinion – It 
should not be misunderstood that even in those cases where due 
inquiry was undertaken under the erstwhile enactments and the 
relevant rules, one can seek a fresh inquiry u/r.12. [Paras 24-25]
Juvenility – Juvenility as an admitted fact – Rules of Evidence:
Held: Admission is a rule of evidence, it is a relevant fact – It 
becomes relevant qua a fact in issue – When an admission is clear, 
unambiguous, continuous and unequivocal, it becomes the best 
form of evidence, and transforms itself into fact in issue – When 
a party makes an admission, either by way of oral statement or 
acknowledging a document authored by them, the Court must 
proceed on that basis – Resultant relief, which is axiomatic, cannot 
be denied on anvil of procedural law – Any contra view would 
result in grave injustice – On an issue where there is no dispute, 
denying a rightful relief would be an affront to fair play and justice – 
However, the Court cannot construe a statement as an admission 
and proceed on that basis – There is a subtle difference between 
an unequivocal admission as against a statement which could be 
construed to be so – Former can be the basis for a relief, latter 
meant for adjudication vis-a-vis the facts of the case. [Para 27]
Maxim – Actus curiae neminem gravabit – Meaning:
Held: No one shall be prejudiced by an act of the Court – Mistake 
committed by the Court cannot stand in the way of one’s rightful 
benefit – It is not the party which commits a mistake, but rather the 
Court itself – Such a mistake cannot act as a barrier for the party 
to get its due relief – However, mistake must be so apparent that it 
does not brook any adjudication on the foundational facts. [Para 28]
Constitution of India – Arts. 72, 161 – Power of the President 
and the Governor to grant pardon – Presidential order – 
Judicial review:
Held: Power of pardon u/Art.72 and 161 is sovereign – It is power 
of compassion and empathy, meant to remove or reduce all pains, 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
367
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
penalties and punishment suffered by a convict – Exercise of 
this sovereign power by either the State or the Centre, is a final 
grace given under the Constitution for the convict to reintegrate 
into the society – Power u/Art.72 and 161 is not appellate or 
revisional in nature, it is an executive power travelling on a 
different channel – Challenge to the exercise of power u/Arts. 72 
and 161 would involve limited judicial review – Courts will have 
to exercise adequate caution and circumspection while dealing 
with an executive order passed in exercise of the power conferred  
u/Arts. 72 or 161 – When challenge is made to executive order, 
with an independent prayer for exercising the power u/s.9(2), 
they being distinct and independent, refusal of judicial review of 
the former will not obliterate the mandatory duty pertaining to the 
latter. [Paras 29-32]
Case Law Cited
Jasraj Inder Singh v. Hemraj Multanchand [1977] 2 SCR 973 : 
(1977) 2 SCC 155; Mohan Singh v. State of M.P. [1999] 1 
SCR 276 : (1999) 2 SCC 428; Shanmugam v. Ariya Kshatriya 
Rajakula Vamsathu Madalaya Nandhavana Paripalanai Sangam 
[2012] 4 SCR 74 : (2012) 6 SCC 430; Maria Margarida Sequeria 
Fernandes  v. Erasmo Jack De Sequeira [2012] 3 SCR 841 : 
(2012) 5 SCC 370; Sugandhi v. P. Rajkumar (2020) 10 SCC 706; 
Munna Pandey v. State of Bihar [2023] 11 SCR 1005 : 2023 SCC 
OnLine SC 1103; Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug v. Union of India 
[2011] 4 SCR 1057 : (2011) 4 SCC 454; Pratap Singh v. State of 
Jharkhand [2005] 1 SCR 1019 : (2005) 3 SCC 551; Jethanand 
and Sons v. State of Uttar Pradesh [1961] 3 SCR 754 : 1961 
SCC OnLine SC 193 : AIR 1961 SC 794; Mohan Lal Magan Lal 
Thacker v. State of Gujarat [1968] 2 SCR 685 : 1967 SCC OnLine 
SC 137 : AIR 1968 SC 733; Lily Thomas v. Union of India [2000] 
3 SCR 1081 : (2000) 6 SCC 224; A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Nayak 
[1988] Supp. 1 SCR 1 : (1988) 2 SCC 602; Kehar Singh v. Union 
of India [1988] Supp. 3 SCR 1102 : (1989) 1 SCC 204; State 
of Haryana v. Jagdish [2010] 3 SCR 716 : (2010) 4 SCC 216; 
Shatrughan Chauhan v. Union of India [2014] 1 SCR 609 : (2014) 
3 SCC 1; Ram Narain v. State of Uttar Pradesh [2015] 9 SCR 
200 : (2015) 17 SCC 699; Hari Dutt Sharma v. The State of Uttar 
Pradesh, Order of the Supreme Court dated 07.02.2022 in Writ 
Petition (Crl.) 367 of 2021; Hari Ram v. State of Rajasthan [2009] 
7 SCR 623 : (2009) 13 SCC 211; Abdul Razzaq v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh (2015) 15 SCC 637; T Barai v. Henry Ah Hoe and Another  
368
[1983] 1 SCR 905 : (1983) 1 SCC 177; Ram Deo Chauhan v. 
Bani Kanta Das [2010] 15 SCR 957 : (2010) 14 SCC 209; Vinay 
Sharma v. Union of India [2020] 10 SCR 393 : (2020) 4 SCC 391; 
Pawan Kumar Gupta v. State (NCT of Delhi) [2020] 4 SCR 1055 : 
(2021) 13 SCC 249 – referred to.
United Australia Limited v. Barclay’s Bank Ltd [1941] A.C. 1 – 
referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 (Act No. 53 of 
1986); Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 
(Act No. 56 of 2000); Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of 
Children) Act, 2015 (Act No. 2 of 2016); Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection of Children) Rules, 2007; Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973; Right to Information Act, 2005.
List of Keywords
Plea of juvenility; Special homes; Juvenility; Birth certificate issued 
by School; Review Petition; Mercy Petition before the Governor; 
Mercy Petition before Hon’ble the President of India; Ossification 
test; Medical Age Certificate; Presidential Order; Death sentence; 
Life imprisonment; Curative Petition; Executive order; Social 
welfare legislation; State Legal Services Authority; Rehabilitation 
and reintegration into the society upon release; Right to livelihood, 
shelter and sustenance guaranteed u/Art.21; Justice delivery system; 
Concept of truth; Duty of Court; Procedural law; Substantive law; 
Judicial system; Juvenile justice; Rights of juvenile; Role of juvenile 
courts; Role of Constitutional Courts; Deviant behaviour of a child; 
Inequality; Environment; Plea of juvenility vis-à-vis final disposal; 
Even after the final disposal of the case; Determination of age; 
Hierarchy of documents; Matriculation certificate; Birth certificate 
from school; Birth certificate by local authority; Juvenility as an 
admitted fact; Rules of Evidence; Maxim; Actus curiae neminem 
gravabit; Power of the President to grant pardon; Power of the 
Governor to grant pardon; Presidential order; Judicial review; United 
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile 
Justice, 1985; United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles 
Deprived of their Liberty, 1990; Hague Convention on Protection of 
Children and Cooperation in respect of Intercountry Adoption, 1993.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
369
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No.   
4229 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.08.2019 of the High Court 
of Uttarakhand at Nainital in WPCRL No. 1531 of 2017
Appearances for Parties
Dr. S. Muralidhar, Sr. Adv., Prateek K Chadha, Ms. Ninni Susan 
Thomas, M.A. Karthik, Maitreya Subramaniam, Ms. Pallak Bhagat, 
Yash S Vijay, Ms. Sakshi Jain, Ms. Pooja B Mehta, Sreekar Aechuri, 
Aniket Chauhaan, Arjun Nayyar, Advs. for the Appellant.
K M Nataraj, A.S.G., Shailesh Madiyal, Sr. Adv., Digvijay Dam, 
Raghav Sharma, Ms. Mrinal Elker Mazumdar, Vinayak Sharma, 
Arvind Kumar Sharma, Ms. Vanshaja Shukla, Ms. Ankeeta Appanna, 
Ms. Rachna Gandhi, Siddhant Yadav, Advs. for the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
M. M. Sundresh, J.
1.	
Heard the Learned Senior Counsel Dr. S. Muralidhar for the Appellant, 
and Learned Additional Solicitor General Mr. K.M. Nataraj and Learned 
Counsel Ms. Vanshaja Shukla for the Respondents. We have also 
carefully perused the written arguments along with the documents, 
filed by both the sides in respect of their respective contentions. 
2.	
We are dealing with a case where grave injustice has been 
perpetrated, on account of the consistent failure on part of the judicial 
machinery to recognise and act upon the constitutional mandate vis-
a-vis the plea of juvenility. Lord Atkin’s words of wisdom in United 
Australia Limited v. Barclay’s Bank Ltd., [1941] A.C. 1 at p.29 
become relevant in the aforementioned context:
“…When these ghosts of the past stand in the 
path of justice clanking their medieval chains the 
proper course for the judge is to pass through them 
undeterred.”
(emphasis supplied)
370
3.	
We are further reminded of the words of V.R. Krishna Iyer J., on the 
laudable ideals of truth and justice in Jasraj Inder Singh v. Hemraj 
Multanchand (1977) 2 SCC 155:-
“8. ...Truth, like song, is whole and half-truth can be 
noise; Justice is truth, is beauty and the strategy of 
healing injustice is discovery of the whole truth and 
harmonising human relations. Law’s finest hour is 
not in meditating on abstractions but in being the 
delivery agent of full fairness. This divagation is 
justified by the need to remind ourselves that the 
grammar of justice according to law is not little 
litigative solution….”
(emphasis supplied)
TRUTH AND THE COURT
4.	
Justice is nothing but a manifestation of the truth. It is truth which 
transcends every other action. The primary duty of a Court is to make 
a single-minded endeavour to unearth the truth hidden beneath the 
facts. Thus, the Court is a search engine of truth, with procedural 
and substantive laws as its tools.
5.	
When procedural law stands in the way of the truth, the Court must 
find a way to circumvent it. Similarly, when substantive law, as it 
appears, does not facilitate the emergence of the truth, it is the 
paramount duty of the Court to interpret the law in light of its teleos. 
Such an exercise is warranted in a higher degree, particularly while 
considering a social welfare legislation.
6.	
In its journey, the Court must discern the truth, primarily from the 
material available on record in the form of pleadings, and arguments 
duly supported by documents. It must be kept in mind that the entire 
judicial system is meant for the discovery of the truth, it being the 
soul of a decision. For doing so, a Presiding Officer is expected to 
play an active role, rather than a passive one. 
7.	
We shall now place on record the views expressed and judgments 
rendered on the concept of truth. Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer, at the 18th 
Annual Conference of the American Judges Association at Seattle, 
Washington State. (1979) 1 SCC J-7, stated thus-
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
371
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
“Our profession is totally committed to Justice—
individual, social and spiritual. Truth, holistic truth, 
is the basis of Justice and thus the great question 
of history, What is Justice, is also the perennial 
interrogation, What is Truth? Once we awaken to this 
profound core, our attitude to pathological crime and 
therapeutic punishment, to inner harmony and societal 
peace, will be transformed into a high pursuit of truth 
beyond “the madding crowd’s ignoble strife.”…
xxx
xxx
xxx
…The progressive manifestation of the divinity in man 
is the recognition of the dignity and worth of the human 
person and this curative process is the healing hope of 
decriminalization—not stone walls nor iron bars nor other 
subtle barbarities. This know-how of humanization alone 
can dissolve the dilemma.”
(emphasis supplied)
Mohan Singh v. State of M.P. (1999) 2 SCC 428
“11. …Efforts should be made to find the truth, this is 
the very object for which courts are created. To search 
it out, the courts have been removing the chaff from 
the grain. It has to disperse the suspicious cloud and 
dust out the smear of dust as all these things clog the 
very truth. So long as chaff, cloud and dust remain, 
the criminals are clothed with this protective layer to 
receive the benefit of doubt. So it is a solemn duty of 
the courts, not to merely conclude and leave the case 
the moment suspicions are created. It is the onerous 
duty of the court, within permissible limit, to find out 
the truth.…” 
(emphasis supplied)
Shanmugam v. Ariya Kshatriya Rajakula Vamsathu Madalaya 
Nandhavana Paripalanai Sangam (2012) 6 SCC 430
“Entire journey of a Judge is to discern the truth
24. The entire journey of a Judge is to discern the 
truth from the pleadings, documents and arguments 
372
of the parties. Truth is the basis of the justice delivery 
system….”
(emphasis supplied)
Maria Margarida Sequeria Fernandes v. Erasmo Jack De 
Sequeira (2012) 5 SCC 370
“33. The truth should be the guiding star in the entire 
judicial process. Truth alone has to be the foundation 
of justice. The entire judicial system has been created 
only to discern and find out the real truth. Judges at 
all levels have to seriously engage themselves in the 
journey of discovering the truth. That is their mandate, 
obligation and bounden duty. Justice system will 
acquire credibility only when people will be convinced 
that justice is based on the foundation of the truth.
xxx
xxx
xxx
44. Malimath Committee on Judicial Reforms heavily 
relied on the fact that in discovering truth, the Judges 
of all courts need to play an active role. The Committee 
observed thus:
‘2.2. … In the adversarial system truth is supposed 
to emerge from the respective versions of the facts 
presented by the prosecution and the defence before 
a neutral Judge. The Judge acts like an umpire to see 
whether the prosecution has been able to prove the 
case beyond reasonable doubt….
xxx
xxx
xxx
…The Judge in his anxiety to maintain his position of 
neutrality never takes any initiative to discover truth. 
He does not correct the aberrations in the investigation 
or in the matter of production of evidence before court.
xxx
xxx
xxx
2.15. The adversarial system lacks dynamism because it 
has no lofty ideal to inspire. It has not been entrusted with a 
positive duty to discover truth as in the inquisitorial system. 
When the investigation is perfunctory or ineffective, 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
373
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
Judges seldom take any initiative to remedy the 
situation. During the trial, the Judge does not bother if 
relevant evidence is not produced and plays a passive 
role as if he has no duty to search for truth….
xxx
xxx
xxx
2.16.9. Truth being the cherished ideal and ethos of 
India, pursuit of truth should be the guiding star of the 
criminal justice system. For justice to be done truth 
must prevail. It is truth that must protect the innocent 
and it is truth that must be the basis to punish the 
guilty. Truth is the very soul of justice. Therefore, 
truth should become the ideal to inspire the courts to 
pursue. This can be achieved by statutorily mandating 
the courts to become active seekers of truth. It is of 
seminal importance to inject vitality into our system 
if we have to regain the lost confidence of the people. 
Concern for and duty to seek truth should not become 
the limited concern of the courts. It should become 
the paramount duty of everyone to assist the court 
in its quest for truth.”
(emphasis supplied)
Sugandhi v. P. Rajkumar (2020) 10 SCC 706
“9. It is often said that procedure is the handmaid of 
justice. Procedural and technical hurdles shall not be 
allowed to come in the way of the court while doing 
substantial justice. If the procedural violation does 
not seriously cause prejudice to the adversary party, 
courts must lean towards doing substantial justice 
rather than relying upon procedural and technical 
violation. We should not forget the fact that litigation 
is nothing but a journey towards truth which is the 
foundation of justice and the court is required to take 
appropriate steps to thrash out the underlying truth in 
every dispute. Therefore, the court should take a lenient 
view when an application is made for production of the 
documents under sub-rule (3).”
(emphasis supplied)
374
Munna Pandey v. State of Bihar, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1103
“68. The role of a judge in dispensation of justice after 
ascertaining the true facts no doubt is very difficult one. 
In the pious process of unravelling the truth so as 
to achieve the ultimate goal of dispensing justice 
between the parties the judge cannot keep himself 
unconcerned and oblivious to the various happenings 
taking place during the progress of trial of any case. 
No doubt he has to remain very vigilant, cautious, 
fair and impartial, and not to give even a slightest of 
impression that he is biased or prejudiced either due 
to his own personal convictions or views in favour of 
one or the other party. This, however, would not mean 
that the Judge will simply shut his own eyes and be 
a mute spectator, acting like a robot or a recording 
machine to just deliver what stands feeded by the 
parties.
xxx
xxx
xxx
70. This Court has condemned the passive role played 
by the Judges and emphasized the importance and 
legal duty of a Judge to take an active role in the 
proceedings in order to find the truth to administer 
justice and to prevent the truth from becoming a 
casualty….”
(emphasis supplied)
JUVENILE JUSTICE
8.	
A child is a product of the present, in need of being moulded, to 
thrive in the future. Therefore, deviant behaviour of a child in conflict 
with law should be a concern of the society as a whole. One must 
not lose sight of the fact that the child is not responsible for an act 
of crime, but is rather victimized by it. Such a child is nothing but 
an inheritor of crime, a legacy which it does not wish to imbibe. The 
behaviour of a child can be attributed, possibly to two counts, namely, 
the environment that the child grows in, and genetics. On the second 
count, there is abundant research and literature available. However, 
we do not wish to venture much into this, particularly in light of the 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
375
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
innumerable permutations and combinations that could arise out of 
the interaction between these two counts. 
9.	
On the first count, various factors such as socio-economic, political 
and cultural background, and life experience, amongst others, become 
relevant. Thus, remedial measures may be employed for the benefit 
of the child. Since the child does not choose the environment in 
which it grows, deviant behaviour which is a result of exposure to 
a given environment is evidence of rampant inequality. Therefore, 
a child who lives in such a discriminatory environment, requires 
equitable treatment on the touchstone of Article 14 of the Constitution 
of India,  1950 (hereinafter referred to as “the Constitution”). 
Article 15(3) read with Article 39 (e) and (f), Article 45 and Article 47 
of the Constitution, in the form of the Fundamental Rights and the 
Directive Principles of State Policy, emphasise on the need for special 
care for children. The relevant provisions in the Constitution which 
form the foundation of juvenile justice are as under:
Article 15 of the Constitution
“15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of 
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.—
xxx
xxx
xxx
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from 
making any special provision for women and children.”
(emphasis supplied)
Article 39 of the Constitution
“39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by 
the State.—The State shall, in particular, direct its policy 
towards securing—
(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the 
right to an adequate means to livelihood;
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources 
of the community are so distributed as best to subserve 
the common good;
(c) that the operation of the economic system does 
not result in the concentration of wealth and means of 
production to the common detriment;
376
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men 
and women;
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and 
women, and the tender age of children are not abused 
and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity 
to enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength;
(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities 
to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of 
freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are 
protected against exploitation and against moral and 
material abandonment.”
(emphasis supplied)
Article 45 of the Constitution
“45. Provision for early childhood care and education 
to children below the age of six years.—The State 
shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and 
education for all children until they complete the age 
of six years.”
(emphasis supplied)
10.	 In view of the said constitutional mandate, the Court is expected to 
play the role of parens patriae by treating a child not as a delinquent, 
but as a victim, viewed through the lens of reformation, rehabilitation 
and reintegration into the society. 
11.	 Thus, a Juvenile Court is a species of a parent. A delinquent, who 
appears before the Court, is to be protected and re-educated, rather 
than be judged and punished. It is for this purpose, that the Court will 
have to press into service the benevolent provisions for rehabilitation 
introduced by the Legislature. A Juvenile Court assumes the role of 
an institution rendering psychological services. It must forget that it 
is acting as a Court, and must don the robes of a correction home 
for a deviant child. In Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug v. Union of 
India (2011) 4 SCC 454, this Court recognised the need for Courts 
to assume the role of parens patriae and stated thus:
“86. …As stated by Balcombe, J. in J. (A Minor) (Wardship: 
Medical Treatment), In re [(1990) 3 All ER 930 (CA)], 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
377
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
the Court as representative of the Sovereign as 
parens patriae will adopt the same standard which 
a reasonable and responsible parent would do. The 
parens patriae (father of the country) jurisdiction was 
the jurisdiction of the Crown, which, as stated in Airedale 
[1993 AC 789 : (1993) 2 WLR 316 : (1993) 1 All ER 821 
(CA and HL)], could be traced to the 13th century. This 
principle laid down that as the Sovereign it was the 
duty of the King to protect the person and property 
of those who were unable to protect themselves. 
The Court, as a wing of the State, has inherited the 
parens patriae jurisdiction which formerly belonged 
to the King.
xxx
xxx
xxx
Doctrine of parens patriae
126. The doctrine of parens patriae (father of the country) 
had originated in British law as early as in the 13th century. 
It implies that the King is the father of the country and is 
under obligation to look after the interest of those who are 
unable to look after themselves. The idea behind parens 
patriae is that if a citizen is in need of someone who 
can act as a parent who can make decisions and 
take some other action, sometimes the State is best 
qualified to take on this role.
127. In the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in 
Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of India [(1990) 1 SCC 613] 
the doctrine has been explained in some detail as follows: 
(SCC p. 648, para 35)
“35. … In the ‘Words and Phrases’ Permanent 
Edn., Vol. 33 at p. 99, it is stated that parens 
patriae is the inherent power and authority of a 
legislature to provide protection to the person 
and property of persons non sui juris, such as 
minor, insane, and incompetent persons, but 
the words parens patriae meaning thereby ‘the 
father of the country’, were applied originally 
to the King and are used to designate the State 
378
referring to its sovereign power of guardianship 
over persons under disability. Parens patriae 
jurisdiction, it has been explained, is the right 
of the sovereign and imposes a duty on [the] 
sovereign, in public interest, to protect persons 
under disability who have no rightful protector. 
The connotation of the term parens patriae differs 
from country to country, for instance, in England 
it is the King, in America it is the people, etc. The 
Government is within its duty to protect and to 
control persons under disability.”
(emphasis in original)
The duty of the King in feudal times to act as parens 
patriae (father of the country) has been taken over in 
modern times by the State.
128. In Heller v. DOE [125 L Ed 2d 257 : 509 US 312 
(1992)] Mr Kennedy, J. speaking for the US Supreme 
Court observed: (US p. 332)
“ ‘… the State has a legitimate interest under its 
parens patriae powers in providing care to its 
citizens who are unable … to care for themselves’ 
[Ed.: As observed in Addington v. Texas, 441 US 
418 at p. 426.]”.
129. In State of Kerala v. N.M. Thomas [(1976) 2 SCC 
310 : 1976 SCC (L&S) 227 : (1976) 1 SCR 906], SCR at 
p. 951 Mr Mathew, J. observed: (SCC p. 343, para 64)
“64. … the Court also is ‘State’ within the meaning 
of Article 12 (of the Constitution)….”
130. In our opinion, in the case of an incompetent 
person who is unable to take a decision whether to 
withdraw life support or not, it is the Court alone, 
as parens patriae, which ultimately must take this 
decision, though, no doubt, the views of the near 
relatives, next friend and doctors must be given due 
weight.”
(emphasis supplied)
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
379
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
JUVENILE JUSTICE LEGISLATIONS IN INDIA:
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE ACT, 1986 (Act No. 53 of 1986)
12.	 We now touch upon the first Central enactment introduced way back 
in the year 1986, in the form of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 (Act 
No. 53 of 1986) (hereinafter referred to as the “1986 Act”). This was 
the maiden attempt by the Central Legislature for a comprehensive 
and uniform set of national rules for juveniles, recognising the need 
to treat them separately from adults. The term ‘Juvenile’ has been 
defined under Section 2(h) of the 1986 Act as under:
Section 2(h) 
“2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires-
xxx
xxx
xxx
(h) “juvenile” means a boy who has not attained the age 
of sixteen years or a girl who has not attained the age of 
eighteen years”
13.	 Though the 1986 Act did not specifically take into consideration the 
mandate of the Constitution, the Legislature’s concern for juveniles 
is evident from its provisions, including Section 32 of the 1986 Act, 
which made it obligatory on the part of the Competent Authority to 
make due inquiry as to the age of the person brought before it. 
Section 32 
“32. Presumption and determination of age.—(1) Where 
it appears to a competent authority that a person brought 
before it under any of the provisions of this Act (otherwise 
than for the purpose of giving evidence) is a juvenile, the 
competent authority shall make due inquiry as to the 
age of that person and for that purpose shall take 
such evidence as may be necessary and shall record a 
finding whether the person is a juvenile or not, stating 
his age as nearly as may be.
(2) No order of a competent authority shall be deemed 
to have become invalid merely by any subsequent proof 
380
that the person in respect of whom the order has been 
made is not a juvenile, and the age recorded by the 
competent authority to be the age of the person so 
brought before it shall, for the purposes of this Act, 
be deemed to be the true age of that person.”
(emphasis supplied)
JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) 
ACT, 2000 (Act No. 56 of 2000)
14.	 A much more comprehensive and modern exercise undertaken by 
the Central Legislature, taking due note of Article 15(3), clauses (e) 
and (f) of Article 39, Article 45 and Article 47 of the Constitution, 
mandating stakeholders to ensure that all the needs of children 
are fulfilled by elevating them to the status of basic human rights, 
is the enactment of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of 
Children) Act, 2000 (Act No. 56 of 2000) (hereinafter referred to as 
the “2000 Act”). While doing so, certain ideas were borrowed from 
international conventions and covenants including the United Nations 
Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile 
Justice, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as “the Beijing Rules”), and 
the United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived 
of their Liberty, 1990, amongst other instruments. Section 2(k) and 
2(l) of the 2000 Act as amended by Act No. 33 of 2006 defines a 
juvenile as under:
Section 2 (k) and (l) 
“2. Definitions- In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires-
xxx
xxx
xxx
(k) “juvenile” or “child” means a person who has not 
completed eighteenth year of age; 
(l) “juvenile in conflict with law” means a juvenile who 
is alleged to have committed an offence and has not 
completed eighteenth year of age as on the date of 
commission of such offence.”
(emphasis supplied)
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
381
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
The differential age qualification for boys and girls, in order to be 
treated as juveniles, as was prevalent under the 1986 Act, was rightly 
done away with in the 2000 Act.
15.	 The 2000 Act consciously made itself applicable to all pending 
cases, both procedurally and substantively, which has in turn given 
it an element of retrospectivity. One clear omission in the 2000 Act 
is the absence of a specific duty upon the Investigating Agency 
qua a juvenile during investigation, which was highlighted under 
the Beijing Rules. 
Rule 6 of the Beijing Rules
“6 – Scope of discretion 
6.1 In view of the varying special needs of juveniles as well 
as the variety of measures available, appropriate scope 
for discretion shall be allowed at all stages of proceedings 
and at the different levels of juvenile justice administration, 
including investigation, prosecution, adjudication and the 
follow-up of dispositions.”
16.	 Section 7A, along with the Explanation to Section 20 of the 2000 
Act, were introduced into the statute by an amendment vide Act 
No. 33 of 2006, to overcome the ratio of the judgment rendered by 
the Constitution Bench of this Court in Pratap Singh vs. State of 
Jharkhand (2005) 3 SCC 551, wherein it was declared that the benefit 
of juvenility cannot be extended to a person who had completed 18 
years of age as on 01.04.2001 – i.e. the date of enforcement of the 
2000 Act. 
Section 7A 
“7A. Procedure to be followed when claim of juvenility 
is raised before any Court.-
(1) Whenever a claim of juvenility is raised before any court 
or a court is of the opinion that an accused person was 
a juvenile on the date of commission of the offence, the 
Court shall make an inquiry, take such evidence as may 
be necessary (but not an affidavit) so as to determine the 
age of such person, and shall record a finding whether 
the person is a juvenile or a child or not, stating his age 
as nearly as may be:
382
Provided that a claim of juvenility may be raised before 
any court and it shall be recognised at any stage, even 
after final disposal of the case, and such claim shall 
be determined in terms of the provisions contained 
in this Act and the rules made thereunder, even if the 
juvenile has ceased to be so on or before the date of 
commencement of this Act.
(2) If the Court finds a person to be a juvenile on the date 
of commission of the offence under sub-section (1), it shall 
forward the juvenile to the Board for passing appropriate 
order, and the sentence, if any, passed by a court shall 
be deemed to have no effect.”
(emphasis supplied)
Section 20 
“20. Special provision in respect of pending cases-
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all 
proceedings in respect of a juvenile pending in any Court 
in any area on the date on which this Act comes into force 
in that area, shall be continued in that Court as if this Act 
had not been passed and if the Court finds that the juvenile 
has committed an offence, it shall record such finding and 
instead of passing any sentence in respect of the juvenile, 
forward the juvenile to the Board which shall pass orders 
in respect of that juvenile in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act as if it had been satisfied on inquiry under this 
Act that a juvenile has committed the offence:
Provided that the Board may, for any adequate and special 
reason to be mentioned in the order, review the case and 
pass appropriate order in the interest of such juvenile.
Explanation. In all pending cases including trial, 
revision, appeal or any other criminal proceedings 
in respect of a juvenile in conflict with law, in any 
court, the determination of juvenility of such a juvenile 
shall be in terms of clause (l) of section 2, even if 
the juvenile ceases to be so on or before the date of 
commencement of this Act and the provisions of this 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
383
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
Act shall apply as if the said provisions had been in 
force, for all purposes and at all material times when 
the alleged offence was committed.”
(emphasis supplied)
17.	 While Section 7A of the 2000 Act deals with the procedure to be 
followed when a claim of juvenility is raised before any Court, 
Section 20 of the 2000 Act is a special provision in respect of pending 
cases. Under both these provisions, it has been made abundantly clear 
that the 2000 Act and the relevant rules would also be applicable to 
a juvenile who ceased to be so on or before the commencement of 
the 2000 Act. Thus, a retrospective application has been facilitated 
under the 2000 Act.
JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) 
ACT, 2015 (Act No. 2 of 2016)
18.	 The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 
(Act No. 2 of 2016) (hereinafter referred to as the “2015 Act”) is an 
improved version of the earlier legislations. The Hague Convention 
on Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect of Inter-
country Adoption, 1993, has also been factored into. The 2015 
Act undertook the exercise of classifying offences into different 
categories. It defines the word ‘Court’ under Section 2(23), as one 
having original jurisdiction. This definition is only illustrative in nature, 
in tune with the importance of the enactment. 
Section 2
“2. Definitions- In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires:
xxx
xxx
xxx
(23) “court” means a civil court, which has jurisdiction in 
matters of adoption and guardianship and may include 
the District Court, Family Court and City Civil Courts;”
19.	 Thus, any Court which is competent to decide the issue of juvenility 
would come within the purview of the definition clause, which 
includes both the appellate and the revisional forums as well as the 
Constitutional Courts. In other words, every Court of competence 
shall assume the role of a Juvenile Court. We say so as, giving 
384
effect to the provisions of the 2015 Act is imperative in view of the 
constitutional mandate. 
Section 5 
“5. Placement of person, who cease to be a child 
during process of inquiry-Where an inquiry has been 
initiated in respect of any child under this Act, and during 
the course of such inquiry, the child completes the age of 
eighteen years, then, notwithstanding anything contained 
in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, 
the inquiry may be continued by the Board and orders may 
be passed in respect of such person as if such person 
had continued to be a child.”
Section 6 
“6. Placement of persons, who committed an offence, 
when person was below the age of eighteen years-
(1) Any person, who has completed eighteen years of age, 
and is apprehended for committing an offence when he 
was below the age of eighteen years, then, such person 
shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be treated 
as a child during the process of inquiry. 
(2) The person referred to in sub-section (1), if not released 
on bail by the Board shall be placed in a place of safety 
during the process of inquiry. 
(3) The person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 
treated as per the procedure specified under the provisions 
of this Act.”
Sections 5 and 6 of the 2015 Act reiterate the principle 
that even a juvenile who has attained majority during the 
course of inquiry should be treated as a juvenile. 
20.	 Section 9 of the 2015 Act is the very substance of the entire enactment 
and sub section (2) is pari materia to Section 7A of the 2000 Act. 
Section 9 
“9. Procedure to be followed by a Magistrate who has 
not been empowered under this Act- 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
385
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
(1). When a Magistrate, not empowered to exercise the 
powers of the Board under this Act is of the opinion that 
the person alleged to have committed the offence and 
brought before him is a child, he shall, without any delay, 
record such opinion and forward the child immediately 
along with the record of such proceedings to the Board 
having jurisdiction. 
(2) In case a person alleged to have committed an 
offence claims before a court other than a Board, that 
the person is a child or was a child on the date of 
commission of the offence, or if the court itself is of 
the opinion that the person was a child on the date of 
commission of the offence, the said court shall make an 
inquiry, take such evidence as may be necessary (but 
not an affidavit) to determine the age of such person, 
and shall record a finding on the matter, stating the 
age of the person as nearly as may be: 
Provided that such a claim may be raised before any 
court and it shall be recognised at any stage, even 
after final disposal of the case, and such a claim shall 
be determined in accordance with the provisions 
contained in this Act and the rules made thereunder 
even if the person has ceased to be a child on or 
before the date of commencement of this Act. 
(3) If the court finds that a person has committed an 
offence and was a child on the date of commission of such 
offence, it shall forward the child to the Board for passing 
appropriate orders and the sentence, if any, passed by 
the court shall be deemed to have no effect.
(4) In case a person under this section is required to be 
kept in protective custody, while the person’s claim of being 
a child is being inquired into, such person may be placed, 
in the intervening period in a place of safety.”
(emphasis supplied)
Under sub-section (2), it is the fundamental duty of the Court to 
make an inquiry, and take such evidence as may be necessary 
for the purpose of determining the age of the person brought 
386
before it. The proviso to sub-section (2) is a rather interesting 
one. In fact, this proviso throws some light on the main provision, 
giving an extended leverage to the plea of juvenility. Thus, 
the plea of juvenility can be raised before any Court, meaning 
thereby that there is no question of finality in this regard until 
and unless an application filed, invoking this provision, is 
determined in accordance with the 2015 Act and the relevant 
rules. When such a plea is raised, it shall be recognised and 
cannot be brushed aside in a casual or whimsical manner. A 
due determination must be made by judiciously considering the 
material available on record. The Court is expected to travel 
an extra mile to satisfy its conscience as to whether the case 
on hand would attract the provisions of the 2015 Act and, for 
the aforesaid purpose, the process enumerated thereunder will 
have to be necessarily followed. The proviso further clarifies 
that the 2015 Act and the relevant rules are applicable even 
if a person who has been accused of an offence, has ceased 
to be a child on or before the date of the commencement of 
the 2015 Act.
PLEA OF JUVENILITY VIS-A-VIS ‘FINAL DISPOSAL’ 
21.	 We place emphasis on the words “even after the final disposal of 
the case” in Section 9(2) of the 2015 Act. As stated, this provision 
being the heart and soul of the entire Act, must be given its fullest 
meaning and interpretation. If the offence is committed by a child, it 
cannot be treated otherwise than as provided under the 2015 Act. 
After finding out the truth, necessary consequences must follow. 
In a country like ours, where society is fragmented due to various 
reasons including, but not limited to illiteracy and poverty, the role 
which is assigned to the Court assumes great significance. Sufficient 
opportunities must be given to the child in conflict with law to get 
the benefit of the 2015 Act. 
22.	 Merely because a casual adjudication has taken place, it does not 
mean that a plea of juvenility cannot be raised subsequently. This 
is for the simple reason that the plea of juvenility has not attained 
finality. So long as the right of a party subsists, one can never say 
that finality has been attained. In a case where a plea has been 
raised, but not adjudicated upon, the decision rendered thereunder 
would not amount to attaining finality. Likewise, when such a plea is 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
387
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
not treated as one under Section 9(2) of the 2015 Act in compliance 
with the procedural mandate specified thereunder, an order rejecting 
such a plea would not be termed as a final one. To put it differently, 
even assuming a plea of juvenility was raised but not considered 
appropriately at the time of disposal of a Special Leave Petition/
Statutory Criminal Appeal, a Review Petition, or a Curative Petition 
thereafter, it would not bar a competent Court from deciding the 
said issue by following due procedure. We make it clear that if an 
adjudication is based on due determination, then there may not be 
any room for another round of litigation. But, in a case where the 
plea was not treated as an application under Section 9(2) of the 2015 
Act and, the procedure mandated thereunder was not followed, the 
principle as aforesaid would certainly apply as the right of raising the 
plea of juvenility has not ceased and, therefore, subsists. 
23.	 Since the need for taking care of a juvenile in conflict with law is 
mandated by the Constitution, the role of the constitutional Courts 
is significant. Even after the dismissal of a Special Leave Petition/
Statutory Criminal Appeal followed by incidental proceedings 
before this Court, where the plea of juvenility was not consciously 
considered, there would be no bar on the constitutional Courts to 
consciously take a deeper look. Doing so is not an exercise of the 
powers conferred under Articles 32, 136 or 226 of the Constitution, 
but an act in fulfilment of a mandated duty enjoined upon the Courts, 
to give effect to the laudable objective of a social welfare legislation. 
We shall now place on record the views expressed and judgments 
rendered on the aspect of finality, and why a different view can be 
taken by this Court, notwithstanding its earlier decision, in exercise 
of the powers conferred under the Constitution:
Jethanand and Sons v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1961 SCC 
OnLine SC 193 : (1961) 3 SCR 754 : AIR 1961 SC 794
“7. In our view, the order remanding the cases under 
Section 151 of the Civil Procedure Code is not a judgment, 
decree or final order within the meaning of Article 133 of 
the Constitution. By its order, the High Court did not decide 
any question relating to the rights of the parties to the 
dispute. The High Court merely remanded the cases for 
retrial holding that there was no proper trial of the petitions 
filed by the appellants for setting aside the awards. Such 
388
an order remanding the cases for retrial is not a final order 
within the meaning of Article 133(1)(c). An order is final 
if it amounts to a final decision relating to the rights 
of the parties in dispute in the civil proceeding. If after 
the order, the civil proceeding still remains to be tried 
and the rights in dispute between the parties have to 
be determined, the order is not a final order within the 
meaning of Article 133….”
(emphasis supplied)
Mohan Lal Magan Lal Thacker v. State of Gujarat, 1967 
SCC OnLine SC 137 : (1968) 2 SCR 685 : AIR 1968 SC 733
“4. The question as to whether a judgment or an order 
is final or not has been the subject-matter of a number 
of decisions; yet no single general test for finality 
has so far been laid down. The reason probably is that 
a judgment or order may be final for one purpose and 
interlocutory for another or final as to part and interlocutory 
as to part. The meaning of the two words “final” and 
“interlocutory” has, therefore, to be considered separately 
in relation to the particular purpose for which it is required. 
However, generally speaking, a judgment or order 
which determines the principal matter in question is 
termed final. It may be final although it directs enquiries 
or is made on an interlocutory application or reserves 
liberty to apply [Halsbury’s Laws of England (3rd Edn.) 
Vol. 22, 742-43]. In some of the English decisions where 
this question arose, one or the other of the following 
four tests was applied.
1. Was the order made upon an application such that 
a decision in favour of either party would determine 
the main dispute?
2. Was it made upon an application upon which the 
main dispute could have been decided?
3. Does the order as made determine the dispute?
4. If the order in question is reversed, would the action 
have to go on?”
(emphasis supplied)
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
389
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
Lily Thomas v. Union of India (2000) 6 SCC 224
“56. It follows, therefore, that the power of review can be 
exercised for correction of a mistake but not to substitute 
a view. Such powers can be exercised within the limits of 
the statute dealing with the exercise of power. The review 
cannot be treated like an appeal in disguise. The mere 
possibility of two views on the subject is not a ground for 
review. Once a review petition is dismissed no further 
petition of review can be entertained. The rule of law of 
following the practice of the binding nature of the larger 
Benches and not taking different views by the Benches 
of coordinated jurisdiction of equal strength has to be 
followed and practised. However, this Court in exercise 
of its powers under Article 136 or Article 32 of the 
Constitution and upon satisfaction that the earlier 
judgments have resulted in deprivation of fundamental 
rights of a citizen or rights created under any other 
statute, can take a different view notwithstanding the 
earlier judgment.”
(emphasis supplied)
HIERARCHY OF DOCUMENTS 
24.	 Rule 12 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Rules, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the “2007 Rules”) must be 
understood and appreciated in tune with the principal Act. 
Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules
“12. Procedure to be followed in determination of age.
xxx
xxx
xxx
(3) In every case concerning a child or juvenile in conflict 
with law, the age determination inquiry shall be conducted 
by the court or the Board or, as the case may be, the 
Committee by seeking evidence by obtaining-
(a)(i) the matriculation or equivalent certificates, if 
available; and in the absence whereof;
390
(ii) the date of birth certificate from the school (other 
than a play school) first attended; and in the absence 
whereof;
(iii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a 
municipal authority or a panchayat;
(b)and only in the absence of either (i), (ii) or (iii) of 
clause (a) above, the medical opinion will be sought 
from a duly constituted Medical Board, which will 
declare the age of the juvenile or child. In case exact 
assessment of the age cannot be done, the Court or 
the Board or, as the case may be, the Committee, 
for the reasons to be recorded by them, may, if 
considered necessary, give benefit to the child or 
juvenile by considering his/her age on lower side 
within the margin of one year.
and, while passing orders in such case shall, after taking 
into consideration such evidence as may be available, 
or the medical opinion, as the case may be, record a 
finding in respect of his age and either of the evidence 
specified in any of the clauses (a)(i), (ii), (iii) or in the 
absence whereof, clause (b) shall be the conclusive 
proof of the age as regards such child or the juvenile in 
conflict with law.”
While there is no difficulty in the application of the principal Act 
inclusive of the procedural part, even for a juvenile in conflict 
with law who has attained majority on or after 01.04.2001, Rule 
12 of the 2007 Rules must be applied retrospectively even to 
those cases, especially where no exercise was undertaken 
under any of the State Rules or the erstwhile Acts, on earlier 
occasions. 
25.	 Sub-rule (3) of Rule 12 is nothing but a rule of evidence. It merely 
provides a hierarchy of documents in the order of priority, to be 
taken note of and considered while determining the age of a juvenile 
in conflict with law, in an ongoing inquiry. Sub-rule (3), apart from 
making a reference to specified documents, debars resorting to the 
subsequently mentioned document, except in a case where the earlier 
document(s) is/are not available. Therefore, where a matriculation 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
391
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
certificate is very much available, a date of birth certificate from the 
school or a birth certificate given by a local authority shall never be 
looked into. Only if none of the aforementioned three documents 
is available, can one go for a medical opinion. While interpreting 
this Rule, we make it clear that it should not be misunderstood that 
even in those cases where due inquiry was undertaken under the 
erstwhile enactments and the relevant rules, one can seek a fresh 
inquiry under Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules. 
26.	 Section 94(2) of the 2015 Act is a reiteration of Rule 12 of the 2007 
Rules, and both should be read in consonance with each other. 
Section 94 of the 2015 Act
“94. Presumption and Determination of age
xxx
xxx
xxx
(2) In case, the Committee or the Board has reasonable 
grounds for doubt regarding whether the person brought 
before it is a child or not, the Committee or the Board, 
as the case may be, shall undertake the process of age 
determination, by seeking evidence by obtaining — 
(i) the date of birth certificate from the school, or 
the matriculation or equivalent certificate from the 
concerned examination Board, if available; and in 
the absence thereof; 
(ii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a 
municipal authority or a panchayat; 
(iii) and only in the absence of (i) and (ii) above, age 
shall be determined by an ossification test or any other 
latest medical age determination test conducted on 
the orders of the Committee or the Board: 
Provided such age determination test conducted on the 
order of the Committee or the Board shall be completed 
within fifteen days from the date of such order.”
JUVENILITY AS AN ADMITTED FACT
27.	 Admission is a rule of evidence. It is a relevant fact. It becomes 
relevant qua a fact in issue. When an admission is clear, unambiguous, 
392
continuous and unequivocal, it becomes the best form of evidence, 
and transforms itself into a fact in issue. When a party makes an 
admission, either by way of an oral statement or by acknowledging 
a document authored by them, the Court must proceed on that 
basis. The resultant relief, which is axiomatic, cannot be denied on 
the anvil of procedural law. Any contra view would result in grave 
injustice. On an issue where there is no dispute, denying a rightful 
relief would be an affront to fair play and justice. Here, we may add 
a word of caution. The Court cannot construe a statement as an 
admission and proceed on that basis. There is a subtle difference 
between an unequivocal admission as against a statement which 
could be construed to be so. It must be seen contextually. While 
the former can be the basis for a relief, the latter is one meant for 
adjudication vis-a-vis the facts of the case. 
ACTUS CURIAE NEMINEM GRAVABIT
28.	 No one shall be prejudiced by an act of the Court. A mistake 
committed by the Court cannot stand in the way of one’s rightful 
benefit. It is not the party which commits a mistake, but rather the 
Court itself. Hence, such a mistake cannot act as a barrier for the 
party to get its due relief. However, we make it clear that the mistake 
must be so apparent that it does not brook any adjudication on the 
foundational facts. 
A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Nayak (1988) 2 SCC 602
“82. Lord Cairns in Rodger v. Comptoir D’escompte De 
Paris [(1869-71) LR 3 PC 465, 475 : 17 ER 120] observed 
thus:
“Now, Their Lordships are of opinion, that one 
of the first and highest duties of all courts is to 
take care that the act of the court does no injury 
to any of the suitors, and when the expression 
‘the act of the court’ is used, it does not mean 
merely the act of the primary court, or of any 
intermediate court of appeal, but the act of the 
court as a whole, from the lowest court which 
entertains jurisdiction over the matter up to the 
highest court which finally disposes of the case. 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
393
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
It is the duty of the aggregate of those Tribunals, 
if I may use the expression, to take care that no 
act of the court in the course of the whole of the 
proceedings does an injury to the suitors in the 
court.”
83. This passage was quoted in the Gujarat High Court 
by D.A. Desai, J., speaking for the Gujarat High Court in 
Soni Vrajlal v. Soni Jadavji [AIR 1972 Guj 148 : (1972) 
13 Guj LR 555] as mentioned before. It appears that in 
giving directions on February 16, 1984, this Court acted 
per incuriam inasmuch it did not bear in mind consciously 
the consequences and the provisions of Sections 6 and 7 
of the 1952 Act and the binding nature of the larger Bench 
decision in Anwar Ali Sarkar case [1952 SCR 284 : AIR 
1952 SC 75 : 1952 Cri LJ 510] which was not adverted to by 
this Court. The basic fundamentals of the administration 
of justice are simple. No man should suffer because 
of the mistake of the court. No man should suffer a 
wrong by technical procedure of irregularities. Rules 
or procedures are the handmaids of justice and not the 
mistress of the justice. Ex debito justitiac, we must do 
justice to him. If a man has been wronged so long as 
it lies within the human machinery of administration 
of justice that wrong must be remedied. This is a 
peculiar fact of this case which requires emphasis.”
(emphasis supplied)
JUDICIAL REVIEW OF THE PRESIDENTIAL ORDER
29.	 The power of pardon, as conferred under Article 72 and 161 of the 
Constitution, is sovereign. It is a power of compassion and empathy. 
It is meant to remove or reduce all pains, penalties and punishment 
suffered by a convict. The exercise of the aforementioned sovereign 
power by the highest constitutional authority, either of the State or the 
Centre, is a final grace given under the Constitution for the convict 
to reintegrate into the society.
30.	 Power under Article 72 and 161 of the Constitution is not appellate or 
revisional in nature. It is an executive power travelling on a different 
channel, which cannot be termed as a power of appeal or review. 
394
31.	 A challenge to the exercise of power under Article 72 and 161 of the 
Constitution would involve limited judicial review on grounds such 
as inadequate application of mind, amongst others. 
Kehar Singh v. Union of India (1989) 1 SCC 204
“10. We are of the view that it is open to the President in 
the exercise of the power vested in him by Article 72 of 
the Constitution to scrutinise the evidence on the record 
of the criminal case and come to a different conclusion 
from that recorded by the court in regard to the guilt of, 
and sentence imposed on, the accused. In doing so, the 
President does not amend or modify or supersede the 
judicial record. The judicial record remains intact, and 
undisturbed. The President acts in a wholly different 
plane from that in which the Court acted. He acts 
under a constitutional power, the nature of which is 
entirely different from the judicial power and cannot 
be regarded as an extension of it….”
(emphasis supplied)
State of Haryana v. Jagdish (2010) 4 SCC 216 
“28. Nevertheless, we may point out that the power of 
the sovereign to grant remission is within its exclusive 
domain and it is for this reason that our Constitution 
makers went on to incorporate the provisions of Article 
72 and Article 161 of the Constitution of India. This 
responsibility was cast upon the executive through 
a constitutional mandate to ensure that some public 
purpose may require fulfilment by grant of remission in 
appropriate cases. This power was never intended to be 
used or utilised by the executive as an unbridled power 
of reprieve. Power of clemency is to be exercised 
cautiously and in appropriate cases, which in effect, 
mitigates the sentence of punishment awarded and 
which does not, in any way, wipe out the conviction. 
It is a power which the sovereign exercises against 
its own judicial mandate. The act of remission of the 
State does not undo what has been done judicially. 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
395
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
The punishment awarded through a judgment is not 
overruled but the convict gets benefit of a liberalised 
policy of State pardon….”
(emphasis supplied)
Shatrughan Chauhan v. Union of India (2014) 3 SCC 1
“242. In the aforesaid batch of cases, we are called upon 
to decide on an evolving jurisprudence, which India has to 
its credit for being at the forefront of the global legal arena. 
Mercy jurisprudence is a part of evolving standard of 
decency, which is the hallmark of the society.
xxx
xxx
xxx
244. It is well established that exercising of power under 
Articles 72/161 by the President or the Governor is a 
constitutional obligation and not a mere prerogative. 
Considering the high status of office, the Constitution 
Framers did not stipulate any outer time-limit for 
disposing of the mercy petitions under the said Articles, 
which means it should be decided within reasonable 
time. However, when the delay caused in disposing 
of the mercy petitions is seen to be unreasonable, 
unexplained and exorbitant, it is the duty of this Court 
to step in and consider this aspect. Right to seek for 
mercy under Articles 72/161 of the Constitution is a 
constitutional right and not at the discretion or whims 
of the executive. Every constitutional duty must be 
fulfilled with due care and diligence, otherwise judicial 
interference is the command of the Constitution for 
upholding its values.
245. Remember, retribution has no constitutional 
value in our largest democratic country. In India, 
even an accused has a de facto protection under 
the Constitution and it is the Court’s duty to shield 
and protect the same. Therefore, we make it clear 
that when the judiciary interferes in such matters, 
it does not really interfere with the power exercised 
396
under Articles 72/161 but only to uphold the de facto 
protection provided by the Constitution to every 
convict including death convicts.”
(emphasis supplied)
32.	 Suffice it is to state that Courts will have to exercise adequate 
caution and circumspection while dealing with an executive order 
passed in exercise of the power conferred under Article 72 or 161 
of the Constitution. We make it clear that when a challenge is made 
to an executive order, with an independent prayer for exercising the 
power under Section 9(2) of the 2015 Act, they being distinct and 
independent, refusal of judicial review of the former will not obliterate 
the mandatory duty pertaining to the latter.
FACTUAL MATRIX
33.	 The Appellant stood charged for the offence of culpable homicide 
amounting to murder. The incident occurred way back on 15.11.1994. 
A statement under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (hereinafter referred to as “CrPC, 1973”) was recorded by the 
trial Court. Under the format of the statement, the Appellant gave 
his name, his father’s name, his age and other particulars. He had 
given his age as 20 years, as on 07.03.2001. In reply to Question 
No. 26, he stated that it was correct that he had opened a bank 
account and that a cheque book had been issued. This statement 
is irrelevant in the context of juvenility.
34.	 After his conviction, he raised the plea of juvenility during the 
hearing on sentence by stating that he was about 17 years of age 
at the time of occurrence. It is not in dispute that he was illiterate. 
The trial Court, while relying upon his statement regarding the 
bank account, presumed that he was a major and sentenced him 
to death, overwhelmed by the nature of the crime. On an appeal 
to the High Court, the Appellant was represented by an Amicus 
Curiae. An attempt was again made to raise the plea of juvenility, 
by stating that the Appellant was required to be tried by a Juvenile 
Court and be given the benefit of being a juvenile. Once again, the 
bank account and the cheque book were relied upon. In tune with 
the thinking of the trial Court, the High Court was also persuaded 
by the offence committed.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
397
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
35.	 The matter reached this Court. This time, the Appellant placed reliance 
upon the birth certificate issued by the Dariya Para Bodinath Board 
School dated 28.04.2001. This Court, having found that the reasoning 
of the High Court cannot be faulted with, dismissed the appeal. 
Thus, the views expressed by the trial Court and confirmed by the 
High Court were duly concurred with. Undeterred and undaunted, 
the Appellant filed a Review Petition, reiterating the fact that he 
was a minor at the time of the offence. It was also pointed out that 
it was his deceased employer who filled the details to open the 
bank account. The Review Petition was dismissed. After the said 
dismissal, a Mercy Petition filed before the Governor of the State of 
Uttarakhand, was also rejected.
36.	 Thereafter, a Writ Petition was filed before this Court, by the 
Appellant’s parents along with a social worker, enclosing a copy of 
the school certificate dated 19.06.2003 from the headmaster and a 
transfer certificate dated 28.04.2001. This Writ Petition filed invoking 
Article 32 of the Constitution, was dismissed on 16.02.2005 with 
liberty to invoke the curative jurisdiction of this Court. Accordingly, a 
Curative Petition was filed. It is interesting to note that by way of a 
counter affidavit to the Curative Petition, Respondent No. 2 herein, 
after verifying the school certificate, produced another certificate 
dated 07.01.2006 issued by the Dariya Para Bodinath Board School, 
which reiterated the fact that the Appellant was 14 years of age on 
the date of the occurrence. Unfortunately, this Curative Petition was 
also dismissed by an order of this Court dated 06.02.2006. 
37.	 After the amendment incorporating Section 7A into the 2000 Act, the 
Appellant’s mother filed a Mercy Petition before Hon’ble the President 
of India. During the pendency of the said Mercy Petition, the 2007 
Rules, came into effect. Incidentally, an ossification test was also 
done by a Medical Board constituted by the Meerut Jail, on a request 
made by the Appellant by way of an application. The Medical Age 
Certificate issued therein also indicated that the Appellant was aged 
around 14 years at the time of the occurrence. 
38.	 By the Presidential Order dated 08.05.2012, the death sentence 
of the Appellant was commuted to life imprisonment, with a caveat 
that he shall not be released until the attainment of 60 years of age. 
An application under the Right to Information Act, 2005 was filed 
thereafter by the Appellant, through which information was obtained 
398
from the bank that any minor above 10 years of age can have an 
independent bank account, provided he knew how to read and write, 
and also that no cheque book was issued for the bank account 
opened in the name of the Appellant. 
39.	 A subsequent Curative Petition filed by him was rejected by the 
Registry as not maintainable. In the year 2019, the Appellant filed 
a Writ Petition before the High Court invoking Article 226 of the 
Constitution, laying a challenge to the Presidential Order while seeking 
yet another relief on the basis of Section 9(2) of the 2015 Act. By 
a comprehensive judgment, the Writ Petition was dismissed by the 
High Court inter alia holding that the power of judicial review over an 
executive order passed in exercise of Article 72 of the Constitution 
is limited, and the proceedings against the Appellant had attained 
finality. Suffice it is to state that merits were not gone into in view of 
the clear stand of the State on the age of the Appellant. Aggrieved, 
the Appellant is before us.
SUBMISSIONS
40.	 Dr. S. Muralidhar, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Appellant 
submitted that the High Court committed an error in not considering 
the independent prayer sought for by the Appellant. It is not in 
dispute that the age of the Appellant was 14 years at the time of 
commission of the offence. There is no judicial finality attained and 
the phrase “any stage” used in Section 9(2) of the 2015 Act must 
be given an extended meaning. There is no contrary finding given 
against the Appellant vis-à-vis the plea of juvenility, which he has 
raised at every stage. It is a case where grave injustice has been 
meted out, as can be demonstrated by the lack of adjudication 
and, therefore, the Appellant is entitled for immediate release. As 
the Appellant has been unfairly kept under incarceration including 
the earlier solitary confinement, which is obviously untenable and 
illegal, while granting the relief of releasing the Appellant forthwith, 
he should be adequately compensated for the loss of formative years 
suffered by him in the prison.
41.	 To buttress his submissions, the Learned Senior Counsel has placed 
reliance upon the following decisions:
(i).	
Section 9(2) of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 can be invoked 
even after the final disposal of the case
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
399
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
	•
Ram Narain v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2015) 17 SCC 699.
	•
Hari Dutt Sharma v. The State of Uttar Pradesh, Order 
of the Supreme Court dated 07.02.2022 in Writ Petition 
(Crl.) 367 of 2021. 
(ii).	 Beneficial and retrospective applicability of change in law 
post the dismissal of the Curative Petition on 06.02.2006
	•
Hari Ram v. State of Rajasthan (2009) 13 SCC 211.
	•
Abdul Razzaq v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2015) 15 SCC 637.
	•
T Barai v. Henry Ah Hoe and another (1983) 1 SCC 177.
(iii).	 Claim of juvenility can be raised and considered even 
after the President has exercised powers under Article 72, 
Constitution of India
	•
Kehar Singh v. Union of India (1989) 1 SCC 204.
	•
Ram Deo Chauhan v. Bani Kanta Das (2010) 14 SCC 209.
42.	 Per contra, Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned Additional Solicitor General, and 
learned Counsel Ms. Vanshaja Shukla appearing for the Respondents 
submitted that this is an attempt to reopen and re-hear an issue which 
has attained finality. There was indeed an adjudication by this Court 
on the earlier occasion. The Mercy Petition was considered under 
the constitutional mandate and, therefore, it does not require any 
interference. The Special Leave Petition, as filed, is not maintainable. 
The bone ossification test cannot be the sole basis for declaring the 
appellant as the minor. While summing up, the Learned Additional 
Solicitor General submitted that without prejudice to the other 
contentions, if this Court comes to the aid of the Appellant, it should 
be clarified that it shall not stand as a precedent. In any case, there 
is due compliance of Rule 12(3) of the 2007 Rules, which is not in 
dispute, as can be seen even from the present affidavit filed by the 
Respondent No.2. 
43.	 To buttress her submissions, the Learned Counsel for Respondent 
No. 2 has placed reliance upon the following decisions:
	•
Vinay Sharma v. Union of India (2020) 4 SCC 391.
	•
Pawan Kumar Gupta v. State (NCT of Delhi) (2021) 13 SCC 249.
400
DISCUSSION
44.	 During the course of the hearing, we directed Respondent No.2 
to obtain fresh instructions on the admission made in the counter 
affidavit filed by it in the Curative Petition filed earlier by the Appellant. 
This was pertaining to the certificate produced by the Appellant 
and the validity of the ossification test. An affidavit has been filed 
by Respondent No. 2 reiterating its earlier stand as regards the 
certificate. Therefore, on facts, there is no dispute that the Appellant 
was only 14 years old at the time of the commission of the offence.
45.	 The facts as narrated above, speak for themselves. At every stage, 
injustice has been inflicted by the Courts, either by ignoring the 
documents or by casting a furtive glance. The Appellant despite 
being illiterate, raised this plea one way or another, right from the trial 
Court up to the conclusion of the Curative Petition before this Court. 
46.	 The approach of the Courts in the earlier round of litigation cannot 
be sustained in the eye of law. There can be no reliance on the 
statement recorded under Section 313 of CrPC, 1973 particularly 
when the Appellant was asked to give his particulars for the purpose 
of recording his statement. Even the said statement shows that he 
was 20 years of age at the time of making his deposition, which 
could only mean that he was 14 years of age at the time of the 
commission of the offence. The bank account has no relevance 
under the Acts and the relevant rules, and in any case, it is to be 
proved, though not contemplated under Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules. 
The statement given by the Appellant at the time of the hearing on 
his sentence, would also pale into insignificance, as even then he 
would have been a minor at the time of commission of the offence, 
under both the 2000 and the 2015 Acts. 
47.	 Though the 2000 Act was already enacted before the Appellant’s 
conviction, even assuming that only the 1986 Act was in vogue, the 
procedural mandate contemplated thereunder was also not followed 
by the trial Court and the High Court. Before this Court, the Appellant 
had relied upon the school certificate in the Criminal Appeal. It was 
once again relied upon in the Review Petition. Thereafter, additional 
documents were relied upon by the Appellant in the Writ Petition and 
also in the Curative Petition which was subsequently filed. In the 
Curative Petition, a counter affidavit was filed by the State certifying 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
401
Om Prakash @ Israel @ Raju @ Raju Das v.  
Union of India and Another
the documents furnished by the Appellant to be true. Nonetheless, 
the said petition was dismissed without according any reason. 
48.	 We are taking note of these facts only for the purpose of dealing with 
the case as these discussions are not even relevant in view of the 
clear statement in writing made on two occasions by the Respondent 
No. 2. We may further add that even the then existing State Rules 
were not duly followed, and if followed, the same would have enured 
to the benefit of the Appellant. 
49.	 We would only say that when the plea of juvenility was raised, it 
should have been dealt with under the existing laws at the relevant 
point of time, especially when there exists a tacit and clear admission 
as to the age of the Appellant. In fact, there is no need for such 
an inquiry in view of the aforesaid position. In our considered view, 
this Court could have dealt with the Writ Petition filed under Article 
32 of the Constitution, as it raised an independent prayer for the 
enforcement of a right conferred under a social welfare legislation.
50.	 In the subsequent Writ Petition filed before the High Court, two 
different prayers had been made, namely, the determination of the 
Appellant’s plea of juvenility and consequent release, or alternatively, 
judicial review of the decision of the President or the Governor and 
consequent release. As the Executive cannot be construed to have 
undertaken an adjudication on the determination of the age of the 
accused, and with the first prayer being a distinct one invoking Section 
9(2) of the 2015 Act, we feel that the High Court has committed an 
error in its reasoning. We would only state that this is a case where 
the Appellant has been suffering due to the error committed by the 
Courts. We have been informed that his conduct in the prison is 
normal, with no adverse report. He lost an opportunity to reintegrate 
into the society. The time which he has lost, for no fault of his, can 
never be restored. 
51.	 As we find that the Appeal deserves to be allowed in view of the 
conclusion arrived at, we are inclined to set aside the sentence 
imposed in excess of the upper limit prescribed under the relevant 
Act, while maintaining the conviction rendered. It cannot be construed 
that the Presidential Order is interfered with, as the issue that we 
are concerned with, is the failure of the Court in not applying the 
mandatory provisions of the 2015 Act with specific reference to the 
plea of juvenility. Therefore, it is not a review of the Presidential 
402
Order, but a case of giving the benefit of the provisions of the 2015 
Act to a deserving person. 
52.	 From the custody certificate filed on record, it appears that the 
Appellant has undergone imprisonment for almost 25 years, during 
which time, the society has undergone significant transformation which 
the Appellant might be unaware of and find difficult to adjust with. 
53.	 In view of the same, we direct the Uttarakhand State Legal Services 
Authority (for short “the State Authority”) to play a proactive role 
in identifying any welfare scheme of the State/Central Government, 
facilitating the Appellant’s rehabilitation and smooth reintegration into 
the society upon his release, with particular emphasis on his right 
to livelihood, shelter and sustenance guaranteed under Article 21 of 
the Constitution. We further direct the State Authority to assist him 
in availing any such scheme under which he is found eligible and 
wishes to avail, and such assistance may be effected through the 
concerned District Legal Services Authority, if the State Authority 
finds the same expedient and necessary. The Registry is directed 
to forthwith communicate this order to the State Authority.
54.	 The Appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment stands set aside. 
The sentence imposed against the Appellant in excess of the upper 
limit prescribed under the relevant Act, shall stand set aside, while 
making it clear that the conviction shall continue. The Appellant shall 
be released forthwith, if not required in any other case.
55.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain