[2025] 2 S.C.R. 424 : 2025 INSC 162
Vihaan Kumar 
v. 
State of Haryana & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 621 of 2025)
07 February 2025
[Abhay S. Oka* and Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The main issue canvassed by the appellant in this appeal is the 
violation of the appellant’s right under Article 22(1) of the Constitution 
of India as the appellant was not informed of the grounds for his 
arrest.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – Mandatory requirement 
under:
Held: [Per Abhay S. Oka, J.] The requirement of informing a 
person arrested of grounds of arrest is a mandatory requirement 
of Article 22(1). [Para 21(a)]
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – What is the manner of 
informing the arrested person of his grounds of arrest:
Held: [Per Abhay S. Oka, J.] The information of the grounds of 
arrest must be provided to the arrested person in such a manner 
that sufficient knowledge of the basic facts constituting the grounds 
is imparted and communicated to the arrested person effectively 
in the language which he understands – The mode and method of 
communication must be such that the object of the constitutional 
safeguard is achieved. [Para 21(b)]
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – The burden to prove the 
compliance of Article 22(1) is on Investigating Officer/Agency:
Held: [Per Abhay S. Oka, J.] When arrested accused alleges non-
compliance with the requirements of Article 22(1), the burden will 
always be on the Investigating Officer/Agency to prove compliance 
with the requirements of Article 22(1). [Para 21(c)]
* Author
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
425
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) and Art.21 – Non-compliance 
with the requirements of Article 22(1) vitiates the arrest of 
the accused:
Held: [Per Abhay S. Oka, J.] Non-compliance with Article 22(1) will 
be a violation of the fundamental rights of the accused guaranteed 
by the said Article – Moreover, it will amount to a violation of the 
right to personal liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution – 
Therefore, non-compliance with the requirements of Article 22(1) 
vitiates the arrest of the accused – Hence, further orders passed 
by a criminal court of remand are also vitiated – Needless to add 
that it will not vitiate the investigation, charge sheet and trial – But, 
at the same time, filing of chargesheet will not validate a breach 
of constitutional mandate under Article 22(1). [Para 21(d)]
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – Duty of the Judicial 
Magistrate:
Held: [Per Abhay S. Oka, J.] When an arrested person is 
produced before a Judicial Magistrate for remand, it is the duty of 
the Magistrate to ascertain whether compliance with Article 22(1) 
and other mandatory safeguards has been made. [Para 21(e)]
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – Duty of the Court:
Held: [Per Abhay S. Oka, J.] When a violation of Article 22(1) is 
established, it is the duty of the court to forthwith order the release 
of the accused – That will be a ground to grant bail even if statutory 
restrictions on the grant of bail exist – The statutory restrictions do 
not affect the power of the court to grant bail when the violation of 
Articles 21 and 22 of the Constitution is established. [Para 21(f)]
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 – s.50 and s.50A – Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 
2023 – s.47 – Obligatory to inform about the arrest to the 
friends, relatives or persons nominated by the arrested person:
Held: [Per Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, J.] The purpose of 
inserting Section 50A of the CrPC, making it obligatory on the person 
making arrest to inform about the arrest to the friends, relatives or 
persons nominated by the arrested person, is to ensure that they 
would able to take immediate and prompt actions to secure the 
release of the arrested person as permissible under the law – The 
arrested person, because of his detention, may not have immediate 
426
and easy access to the legal process for securing his release, 
which would otherwise be available to the friends, relatives and 
such nominated persons by way of engaging lawyers, briefing them 
to secure release of the detained person on bail at the earliest – 
Therefore, the purpose of communicating the grounds of arrest 
to the detenue, and in addition to his relatives is not merely a 
formality but to enable the detained person to know the reasons 
for his arrest but also to provide the necessary opportunity to 
him through his relatives, friends or nominated persons to secure 
his release at the earliest possible opportunity for actualising the 
fundamental right to liberty and life as guaranteed under Article 
21 of the Constitution – Hence, the requirement of communicating 
the grounds of arrest in writing is not only to the arrested person, 
but also to the friends, relatives or such other person as may be 
disclosed or nominated by the arrested person, so as to make 
the mandate of Article 22(1) of the Constitution meaningful and 
effective failing which, such arrest may be rendered illegal. [Para 3]
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – Penal Code, 1860 – ss. 409, 
420, 467, 468 and 471 r/w. s.120-B – Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 – s.50 – Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 – 
s.47 – Appellant was arrested – Later, he was hospitalised – He 
was handcuffed and chained to the hospital bed – Specific 
averment of the appellant that he was not informed about the 
grounds of arrest or reasons for arrest, and hence, there was 
a violation of s.50 of CrPC:
Held: [Per Abhay S. Oka, J.] A status report/reply was filed by 
Assistant Commissioner of Police before the High Court in response 
to the petition – The grounds taken in the writ petition regarding 
failure to communicate the grounds of arrest were not dealt with in 
the reply – It was merely mentioned that the appellant’s wife was 
informed about the arrest – Thus, it is not even pleaded before the 
High Court that grounds of arrest were communicated or informed 
to the appellant – The communication of the grounds of arrest 
to the wife of the arrestee is no compliance with the mandate of 
Article 22(1) – A contention has been raised for the first time in 
the written argument that the grounds of arrest were incorporated 
in the remand report – The police submit a remand report before 
the Magistrate for seeking remand without serving a copy thereof 
to the arrestee – The reason is that the Police cannot divulge the 
details of the investigation to the accused till the final report is 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
427
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
filed – Mentioning the grounds of arrest in the remand report is no 
compliance with the requirement of informing the arrestee of the 
grounds of arrest – Also, information about the arrest is completely 
different from the grounds of arrest – The grounds of arrest are 
different from the arrest memo – The arrest memo incorporates 
the name of the arrested person, his permanent address, present 
address, particulars of FIR and Section applied, place of arrest, 
date and time of arrest, the name of the officer arresting the 
accused and name, address and phone number of the person 
to whom information about arrest has been given – The same 
contains only the information stated above and not the grounds 
of arrest – The information about the arrest is completely different 
from information about the grounds of arrest – Mere information of 
arrest will not amount to furnishing grounds of arrest – A reliance 
was placed on the case diary entry which records that the appellant 
was arrested after informing him of the grounds of arrest – Only 
on the basis of a vague entry in the police diary, one cannot 
accept that compliance with Article 22(1) can be inferred – No 
contemporaneous documents have been put on record wherein 
the grounds of arrest have been noted – Therefore, reliance 
placed on the diary entries is completely irrelevant – Therefore, 
in the facts of the case, there is no hesitation in holding that the 
arrest of the appellant was rendered illegal on account of failure to 
communicate the grounds of arrest to the appellant as mandated 
by Article 22(1) of the Constitution. [Paras 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28] 
[Per Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh,  J. (concurring)] The 
requirement of communicating the grounds of arrest in writing is 
not only to the arrested person, but also to the friends, relatives 
or such other person as may be disclosed or nominated by the 
arrested person, so as to make the mandate of Article 22(1) of 
the Constitution meaningful and effective failing which, such arrest 
may be rendered illegal. [Para 3]
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – Directions to the State:
Held: [Per Abhay S. Oka, J.] The State of Haryana directed to 
issue guidelines/departmental instructions to the police (i) to ensure 
that the act of handcuffing an accused while he is on a hospital 
bed and tying him to the hospital bed is not committed again; (ii) 
to ensure that the constitutional safeguards under Article 22 are 
strictly followed – If necessary, the State Government to amend 
the existing Rules/guidelines. [Para 33(e)]
428
Case Law Cited
Harikisan v. State of Maharashtra [1962] Supp. 2 SCR 918 : 1962 
SCC OnLine SC 117 – followed.
Pankaj Bansal v. Union of India [2023] 12 SCR 714 : (2024) 7 
SCC 576; Prabir Purkayastha v. State (NCT of Delhi) [2024] 6 
SCR 666 : (2024) 8 SCC 254; Lallubhai Jogibhai Patel v. Union 
of India [1981] 2 SCR 352 : (1981) 2 SCC 427 – relied on.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973; Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
List of Keywords
Article 22(1) of the Constitution; Grounds for arrest; Information of 
the grounds of arrest; Non-compliance with the requirements of 
Article 22(1); Mandatory safeguards; Grounds of arrest in writing; 
Friends; Relatives; Contemporaneous documents; Section 50 of 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Section 50A of Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973; Investigating Officer/Agency.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
621 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 30.08.2024 of the High Court 
of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in CRWP No. 7533 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Kapil Sibal, Shyam Divan, Sr. Advs., Vishal Gosain, Anuroop 
Chakravarti, M.S. Vishnu Sankar, Archit Singh, Ms. Jasmine 
Damkewala, Ms. Zinnea Mehta, Ms. Vaishali Sharma, M/s. Lawfic, 
Ms. Jasmine Damkewala, Archit Singh, Ms. Rupali Samuel,  
Ms. Vaishali Sharma, Advs. for the Appellant.
Deepak Thukral, A.A.G., Sidharth Luthra, Basant R., Sr. Advs., 
Suhaan Mukerji, Adarsh Kumar, Sayandeep Pahari, Kartikeye 
Dang, Abhishek Manchanda, Shariq Ansari, Tanmay Sinha,  
M/s. PLR Chambers And Co., Akshay Amritanshu, Kavinesh RM, 
Naman Vashishtha, Ms. Pragya Upadhyay, Ms. Drishti Saraf, 
Raunak Arora, Sahil A. Garg Narwana, Dipesh Singhal, Kapil Gaba, 
Honey Gola, Amrendra Kumar Mehta, Advs. for the Respondents.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
429
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Abhay S. Oka, J.
ISSUE INVOLVED
1.	
Amongst other issues, the main issue canvassed by the appellant in 
this appeal is the violation of the appellant’s right under Article 22(1) of 
the Constitution of India (for short ‘the Constitution’) as the appellant 
was not informed of the grounds for his arrest. 
FACTUAL ASPECT
2.	
A reference to a few factual aspects would be necessary. The 
challenge in this appeal is to the judgment and order dated 30th 
August 2024 passed by the learned Single Judge of Punjab and 
Haryana High Court. The appellant was arrested in connection 
with first information report no.121 of 2023 dated 25th March 2023 
registered for the offences under Sections 409, 420, 467, 468 and 
471 read with Section 120-B of the Indian Penal Code (for short, 
‘IPC’). According to the appellant’s case, he was arrested on 10th 
June 2024 at about 10.30 a.m. at his office premises on the 3rd-5th 
floor of HUDA City Centre, Gurugram, Haryana. He was taken to DLF 
Police Station, Section 29, Gurugram. He was allegedly produced 
before the learned Judicial Magistrate (in charge) at Gurgaon on 11th 
June 2024 at 3.30 p.m. Therefore, there was a violation of Article 
22(2) of the Constitution and Section 57 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure Code, 1973 (for short, ‘CrPC’). The allegation is that 
neither in the remand report nor in the order dated 11th June 2024 
passed by the learned Magistrate was the time of arrest mentioned. 
The FIR was registered at the instance of the 2nd respondent. We 
may note here that, according to the case of the 1st respondent, the 
appellant was arrested on 10th June 2024 at 6.00 p.m. Therefore, 
compliance with the requirement of Article 22(2) was made. 
3.	
There is another very serious factual aspect. The order dated 4th 
October 2024 passed by this Court records that after the appellant 
was arrested, he was hospitalised in PGIMS, Rohtak. The learned 
counsel appearing for the appellant produced photographs which 
430
showed that while he was admitted to the hospital, he was handcuffed 
and chained to the hospital bed. Therefore, a notice was issued on 4th 
October 2024 to the Medical Superintendent of PGIMS, calling upon 
him to file an affidavit stating whether the appellant was handcuffed 
and chained to the hospital bed. The order dated 21st October 2024 
records the admission of the Medical Superintendent of PGIMS that 
when the appellant was admitted to the hospital, he was handcuffed 
and chained to the bed. On this aspect, we may note that an affidavit 
was filed on 24th October 2024 by Shri Abhimanyu, HPS, Assistant 
Commissioner of Police, EOW I and II, Gurugram, Haryana. The 
affidavit states that the officials who were deployed to escort the 
appellant to PGIMS have been suspended, and a departmental 
inquiry was ordered against them by the Deputy Commissioner of 
Police on 23rd October 2024.
SUBMISSIONS
4.	
The learned senior counsel, Shri Kapil Sibal, appearing on behalf 
of the appellant, invited our attention to the averments made in the 
writ petition filed before the High Court and, particularly, the grounds 
therein. He pointed out that grounds A and B contain a specific 
averment that the appellant was not informed about the grounds 
of arrest or reasons for arrest, and hence, there was a violation of 
Section 50 of CrPC. Further, Article 22(1) has also been violated. He 
pointed out that even in paragraph 13, there is a specific assertion 
to that effect. He invited our attention to the counter affidavit/status 
report filed by Shri Abhimanyu, Assistant Commissioner of Police, 
before the High Court. He submitted that it is not even a case made 
out by him that grounds of arrest were communicated to the appellant 
in some form. Moreover, the specific averment in the petition that 
the grounds of arrest were not informed to the appellant has not 
been denied. He pointed out that the only pleading was that the 
appellant’s wife was informed about the arrest. Therefore, learned 
senior counsel, by relying upon decisions of this Court in the case of 
Pankaj Bansal v. Union of India1 and Prabir Purkayastha v. State 
(NCT of Delhi),2 submitted that on the failure of the 1st respondent 
1	
(2024) 7 SCC 576
2	
(2024) 8 SCC 254
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
431
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
to comply with the mandate of Article 22(1) and Section 50 of CrPC, 
the arrest of the appellant is rendered illegal. He also urged that 
there was a violation of Article 22(2) of the Constitution as he was 
not produced before the learned Magistrate within 24 hours of his 
arrest. Therefore, he must be forthwith set at liberty. 
5.	
Learned senior counsel Shri Basant R. represented the 1st respondent 
state. He submitted that the argument before the High Court as 
noted by the learned Single Judge in paragraph 7 of the impugned 
judgment is that the grounds of arrest were not handed over to him 
in compliance with the provisions of law. He submitted that it was not 
argued that grounds of arrest were not even orally communicated 
as there is no requirement under Article 22(1) or in Section 50 
of CrPC to communicate the grounds of arrest to the arrestee in 
writing. Moreover, he submitted that the mandate of Section 50 is 
that either the full particulars of the offence for which he is arrested 
must be communicated to an arrestee or the grounds of arrest. He 
invited our attention to the arrest memo, which contains details of 
the offence, time and date of arrest, etc. He pointed out that the 
case diaries were placed before the High Court and in fact, the High 
Court examined the case diaries. He submitted that in the daily diary, 
an entry was made at 6.10 p.m. on 10th June 2024, noting that the 
appellant was arrested after informing him of the grounds of arrest. 
He submitted that though the High Court may not have recorded a 
finding based on the case diary, the fact remains that the learned 
Single Judge perused the diary and the entry mentioned above. In 
the written submissions, he urged that the grounds of arrest have 
been set out in the remand report dated 11th June 2024. He urged 
that there is a delay of more than 2 months in raising a contention 
regarding the violation of Article 22(1). He submitted that the appellant 
is now in custody under the process issued on the charge sheet. He 
submitted that there was a compliance made with the requirement 
of Article 22(2).
6.	
Learned senior counsel Shri Siddharth Luthra, appearing for the 
2nd respondent, supported the submissions of the learned counsel 
appearing for the 1st respondent. He submitted that the case diary 
maintained by the police is a contemporaneous record which records 
that grounds of arrest were communicated to the appellant. Therefore, 
there is no reason to disbelieve the stand of the police. 
432
CONSIDERATION OF SUBMISSIONS
PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED FOR ARRESTING A PERSON 
WITHOUT WARRANT
7.	
Sub-Section (1) of Section 41 of CrPC lists cases where police may 
arrest a person without a warrant. The corresponding provision in 
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (for short ‘the BNSS’) 
is Section 35. Section 41 of CrPC reads thus:
“41. When police may arrest without warrant.—(1) Any 
police officer may without an order from a Magistrate 
and without a warrant, arrest any person—
(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a 
cognizable offence;
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, 
or credible information has been received, or a reasonable 
suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable 
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may be less than seven years or which may extend to 
seven years whether with or without fine, if the following 
conditions are satisfied, namely:—
(i)	
the police officer has reason to believe on the basis 
of such complaint, information, or suspicion that such 
person has committed the said offence;
(ii)	
the police office is satisfied that such arrest is 
necessary—
(a)	 to prevent such person from committing any 
further offence; or
(b)	 for proper investigation of the offence; or
(c)	
to prevent such person from causing the evidence 
of the offence to disappear or tampering with 
such evidence in any manner; or
(d)	 to prevent such person from making any 
inducement, threat or promise to any person 
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to 
dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the 
Court or to the police officer; or
(e)	 as unless such person is arrested, his presence 
in the Court whenever required cannot be 
ensured,
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
433
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
and the police officer shall record while making 
such arrest, his reasons in writing.
Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases 
where the arrest of a person is not required 
under the provisions of this sub-section, record 
the reasons in writing for not making the arrest.
(ba) against whom credible information has been 
received that he has committed a cognizable offence 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to more than seven years whether with or 
without fine or with death sentence and the police 
officer has reason to believe on the basis of that 
information that such person has committed the said 
offence;
(c) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under 
this Code or by order of the State Government; or
(d) in whose possession anything is found which may 
reasonably be suspected to be stolen property and who 
may reasonably be suspected of having committed an 
offence with reference to such thing; or
(e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution 
of his duty, or who has escaped, or attempts to escape, 
from lawful custody; or
(f) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from 
any of the Armed Forces of the Union; or
(g) who has been concerned in, or against whom a 
reasonable complaint has been made, or credible 
information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion 
exists, of his having been concerned in, any act committed 
at any place out of India which, if committed in India, would 
have been punishable as an offence, and for which he is, 
under any law relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable 
to be apprehended or detained in custody in India; or
(h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of 
any rule made under sub-section (5) of Section 356; or
(i) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, 
has been received from another police officer, provided 
434
that the requisition specifies the person to be arrested 
and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is to 
be made and it appears therefrom that the person might 
lawfully be arrested without a warrant by the officer who 
issued the requisition.
(2) Subject to the provisions of Section 42, no person 
concerned in a non-cognizable offence or against whom 
a complaint has been made or credible information has 
been received or reasonable suspicion exists of his having 
so concerned, shall be arrested except under a warrant 
or order of a Magistrate.”
(emphasis added)
8.	
In this case, a commission of a cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to more than seven years 
has been alleged against the appellant. Hence, clause (ba) of sub-
Section (1) of Section 41 [clause (c) of sub-Section (1) of Section 
35 of the BNSS] will apply. Therefore, a police officer can arrest a 
person without an order of a Magistrate or warrant subject to the 
following conditions:
a)	
Credible information has been received against the person 
that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment for more than seven years and 
b)	
The police officer has reason to believe on the basis of the 
information received that such a person has committed the 
offence.
Hence, a police officer cannot casually arrest a person against 
whom the commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment 
for more than seven years is alleged. He can arrest provided twin 
conditions in clause (ba) are satisfied. The emphasis is on “credible 
information”. He cannot arrest a person under clause (ba) unless 
credible information is received.
9.	
Article 22 of the Constitution reads thus: 
“22. Protection against arrest and detention in certain 
cases.—(1) No person who is arrested shall be detained 
in custody without being informed, as soon as may 
be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
435
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a 
legal practitioner of his choice.
(2) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody 
shall be produced before the nearest magistrate within a 
period of twenty-four hours of such arrest excluding the 
time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to 
the court of the magistrate and no such person shall be 
detained in custody beyond the said period without the 
authority of a magistrate.
(3) Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) shall apply—
(a)	 to any person who for the time being is an enemy 
alien; or
(b)	 to any person who is arrested or detained under any 
law providing for preventive detention.
(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise 
the detention of a person for a longer period than three 
months unless—
(a)	 an Advisory Board consisting of persons who are, or 
have been, or are qualified to be appointed as, Judges 
of a High Court has reported before the expiration 
of the said period of three months that there is in its 
opinion sufficient cause for such detention:
Provided that nothing in this sub-clause shall authorise 
the detention of any person beyond the maximum 
period prescribed by any law made by Parliament 
under sub-clause (b) of clause (7); or
(b)	 such person is detained in accordance with the 
provisions of any law made by Parliament under 
sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (7).
(5) When any person is detained in pursuance of an 
order made under any law providing for preventive 
detention, the authority making the order shall, as soon 
as may be, communicate to such person the grounds 
on which the order has been made and shall afford 
him the earliest opportunity of making a representation 
against the order.
436
(6) Nothing in clause (5) shall require the authority making 
any such order as is referred to in that clause to disclose 
facts which such authority considers to be against the 
public interest to disclose.
(7) Parliament may by law prescribe—
(a)	 the circumstances under which, and the class or 
classes of cases in which, a person may be detained 
for a period longer than three months under any law 
providing for preventive detention without obtaining 
the opinion of an Advisory Board in accordance with 
the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (4);
(b)	 the maximum period for which any person may in any 
class or classes of cases be detained under any law 
providing for preventive detention; and
(c)	
the procedure to be followed by an Advisory Board 
in an inquiry under sub-clause (a) of clause (4).”
(emphasis added)
Clause (1) of Article 22 provides that no person who is arrested shall 
be detained in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, 
of the grounds for such arrest. 
Then comes Section 50 of CrPC (Section 47 of the BNSS), which 
reads thus:
“50. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of 
arrest and of right to bail.—(1) Every police officer or 
other person arresting any person without warrant shall 
forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the offence 
for which he is arrested or other grounds for such arrest.
(2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any 
person other than a person accused of a non-bailable 
offence, he shall inform the person arrested that he is 
entitled to be released on bail and that he may arrange 
for sureties on his behalf.”
10.	 As far as Article 22(1) is concerned, the legal position is well settled. 
In the case of Pankaj Bansal1, this Court dealt with Section 19 of the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (for short, ‘the PMLA’). 
Section 19 reads thus:
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
437
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
“19. Power to arrest.—(1) If the Director, Deputy Director, 
Assistant Director or any other officer authorised in this 
behalf by the Central Government by general or special 
order, has on the basis of material in his possession, 
reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded 
in writing) that any person has been guilty of an offence 
punishable under this Act, he may arrest such person and 
shall, as soon as may be, inform him of the grounds 
for such arrest.
(2) The Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director or 
any other officer shall, immediately after arrest of such 
person under sub-section (1), forward a copy of the order 
along with the material in his possession, referred to in 
that sub-section, to the Adjudicating Authority, in a sealed 
envelope, in the manner as may be prescribed and such 
Adjudicating Authority shall keep such order and material 
for such period, as may be prescribed.
(3) Every person arrested under sub-section (1) shall, 
within twenty-four hours, be taken to a [Special Court or] 
Judicial Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the 
case may be, having jurisdiction:
Provided that the period of twenty-four hours shall exclude 
the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest 
to the [Special Court or] Magistrate’s Court.”
(emphasis added)
There are two parts of Section 19(1). The first part is the requirement 
of recording in writing the reason to believe that any person has been 
guilty of an offence punishable under the PMLA. No such requirement 
of recording in writing the reason to believe is found in clause (ba) 
of Section 41(1). The second requirement incorporated in Section 
19(1) is that the person arrested shall be informed of the grounds of 
such arrest as soon as may be. The second part is the requirement 
incorporated in Article 22(1). Therefore, even under Section 19(1) of 
PMLA, there is a requirement to inform the arrestee of the grounds 
of arrest. This decision deals with and interprets Article 22(1). In 
paragraph 38 of the decision, this Court held thus:
“38.  In this regard, we may note that Article 22(1) 
of the Constitution provides, inter alia, that no 
person who is arrested shall be detained in custody 
438
without being informed, as soon as may be, of the 
grounds for such arrest. This being the fundamental 
right guaranteed to the arrested person, the mode 
of conveying information of the grounds of arrest 
must necessarily be meaningful so as to serve the 
intended purpose. It may be noted that Section 45 PMLA 
enables the person arrested under Section 19 thereof 
to seek release on bail but it postulates that unless the 
twin conditions prescribed thereunder are satisfied, such 
a person would not be entitled to grant of bail. The twin 
conditions set out in the provision are that, firstly, the 
court must be satisfied, after giving an opportunity to the 
Public Prosecutor to oppose the application for release, 
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the 
arrested person is not guilty of the offence and, secondly, 
that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail. 
To meet this requirement, it would be essential for the 
arrested person to be aware of the grounds on which the 
authorised officer arrested him/her under Section 19 and 
the basis for the officer’s “reason to believe” that he/she 
is guilty of an offence punishable under the 2002 Act. 
It is only if the arrested person has knowledge of these 
facts that he/she would be in a position to plead and 
prove before the Special Court that there are grounds to 
believe that he/she is not guilty of such offence, so as to 
avail the relief of bail. Therefore, communication of the 
grounds of arrest, as mandated by Article 22(1) of the 
Constitution and Section 19 PMLA, is meant to serve 
this higher purpose and must be given due importance.”
(emphasis added)
In the said decision, this Court in paragraphs 42 and 43 observed thus:
“42. That being so, there is no valid reason as to why 
a copy of such written grounds of arrest should not 
be furnished to the arrested person as a matter of 
course and without exception. There are two primary 
reasons as to why this would be the advisable course 
of action to be followed as a matter of principle. Firstly, 
in the event such grounds of arrest are orally read out 
to the arrested person or read by such person with 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
439
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
nothing further and this fact is disputed in a given 
case, it may boil down to the word of the arrested 
person against the word of the authorised officer as 
to whether or not there is due and proper compliance 
in this regard. In the case on hand, that is the situation 
insofar as Basant Bansal is concerned. Though ED claims 
that witnesses were present and certified that the grounds 
of arrest were read out and explained to him in Hindi, that 
is neither here nor there as he did not sign the document. 
Non-compliance in this regard would entail release of the 
arrested person straightaway, as held in V. Senthil Balaji [V. 
Senthil Balaji v. State, (2024) 3 SCC 51 : (2024) 2 SCC 
(Cri) 1] . Such a precarious situation is easily avoided and 
the consequence thereof can be obviated very simply by 
furnishing the written grounds of arrest, as recorded by 
the authorised officer in terms of Section 19(1) PMLA, to 
the arrested person under due acknowledgment, instead 
of leaving it to the debatable ipse dixit of the authorised 
officer.
43. The second reason as to why this would be the 
proper course to adopt is the constitutional objective 
underlying such information being given to the 
arrested person. Conveyance of this information is not 
only to apprise the arrested person of why he/she is 
being arrested but also to enable such person to seek 
legal counsel and, thereafter, present a case before the 
court under Section 45 to seek release on bail, if he/
she so chooses. In this regard, the grounds of arrest in V. 
Senthil Balaji [V. Senthil Balaji v. State, (2024) 3 SCC 51 : 
(2024) 2 SCC (Cri) 1] are placed on record and we find that 
the same run into as many as six pages. The grounds of 
arrest recorded in the case on hand in relation to Pankaj 
Bansal and Basant Bansal have not been produced before 
this Court, but it was contended that they were produced 
at the time of remand. However, as already noted earlier, 
this did not serve the intended purpose. Further, in the 
event their grounds of arrest were equally voluminous, it 
would be well-nigh impossible for either Pankaj Bansal or 
Basant Bansal to record and remember all that they had 
read or heard being read out for future recall so as to avail 
440
legal remedies. More so, as a person who has just been 
arrested would not be in a calm and collected frame of 
mind and may be utterly incapable of remembering the 
contents of the grounds of arrest read by or read out to him/
her. The very purpose of this constitutional and statutory 
protection would be rendered nugatory by permitting the 
authorities concerned to merely read out or permit reading 
of the grounds of arrest, irrespective of their length and 
detail, and claim due compliance with the constitutional 
requirement under Article 22(1) and the statutory mandate 
under Section 19(1) PMLA.”
(emphasis added)
11.	 The view taken in the case of Pankaj Bansal1 was reiterated by this 
Court in the case of Prabir Purkayastha2. In paragraphs nos. 28 
and 29, this Court held thus:
“28. The language used in Article 22(1) and Article 22(5) 
of the Constitution of India regarding the communication 
of the grounds is exactly the identical. Neither of the 
constitutional provisions require that the “grounds” of 
“arrest” or “detention”, as the case may be, must be 
communicated in writing. Thus, interpretation to this 
important facet of the fundamental right as made by the 
Constitution Bench while examining the scope of Article 
22(5) of the Constitution of India would ipso facto apply 
to Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India insofar as the 
requirement to communicate the grounds of arrest is 
concerned.
29. Hence, we have no hesitation in reiterating that the 
requirement to communicate the grounds of arrest or 
the grounds of detention in writing to a person arrested 
in connection with an offence or a person placed under 
preventive detention as provided under Articles 22(1) 
and 22(5) of the Constitution of India is sacrosanct 
and cannot be breached under any situation. Non-
compliance of this constitutional requirement and 
statutory mandate would lead to the custody or the 
detention being rendered illegal, as the case may be.”
(emphasis added)
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
441
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
12.	 This Court held that the language used in Articles 22(1) and 22(5) 
regarding communication of the grounds is identical, and therefore, 
this Court held that interpretation of Article 22(5) made by the 
Constitution Bench in the case of Harikisan v. State of Maharashtra,3 
shall ipso facto apply to Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India 
insofar as the requirement to communicate the ground of arrest 
is concerned. We may also note here that in paragraph 21, in the 
case of Prabir Purkayastha,2 this Court also dealt with the effect 
of violation of Article 22(1) by holding that any infringement of this 
fundamental right would vitiate the process of arrest and remand. 
Paragraph 21 reads thus:
“21. The right to be informed about the grounds of arrest 
flows from Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India and any 
infringement of this fundamental right would vitiate the 
process of arrest and remand. Mere fact that a charge-
sheet has been filed in the matter, would not validate 
the illegality and the unconstitutionality committed 
at the time of arresting the accused and the grant of 
initial police custody remand to the accused.”
(emphasis added)
13.	 In the case of Lallubhai Jogibhai Patel v. Union of India4, in 
paragraph 20, this Court held thus:
“20. It is an admitted position that the detenu does not 
know English. The grounds of detention, which were 
served on the detenu, have been drawn up in English. It 
is true that Shri C.L. Antali, Police Inspector, who served 
the grounds of detention on the detenu, has filed an 
affidavit stating that he had fully explained the grounds 
of detention in Gujarati to the detenu. But, that is not a 
sufficient compliance with the mandate of Article 22(5) of the 
Constitution, which requires that the grounds of detention 
must be “communicated” to the detenu. “Communicate” 
is a strong word. It means that sufficient knowledge of 
the basic facts constituting the “grounds” should be 
imparted effectively and fully to the detenu in writing 
3	
1962 SCC OnLine SC 117
4	
(1981) 2 SCC 427
442
in a language which he understands. The whole purpose 
of communicating the “ground” to the detenu is to enable 
him to make a purposeful and effective representation. If 
the “grounds” are only verbally explained to the detenu 
and nothing in writing is left with him, in a language which 
he understands, then that purpose is not served, and the 
constitutional mandate in Article 22(5) is infringed. If any 
authority is needed on this point, which is so obvious from 
Article 22(5), reference may be made to the decisions 
of this Court in Harikisan v. State of Maharashtra [1962 
Supp 2 SCR 918 : AIR 1962 SC 911 : (1962) 1 Cri LJ 797] 
and Hadibandhu Das v. District Magistrate [(1969) 1 SCR 
227 : AIR 1969 SC 43 : 1969 Cri LJ 274] .”
 (emphasis added)
Therefore, as far as Article 22(1) is concerned, compliance can be made 
by communicating sufficient knowledge of the basic facts constituting 
the grounds of arrest to the person arrested. The grounds should be 
effectively and fully communicated to the arrestee in the manner in 
which he will fully understand the same. Therefore, it follows that the 
grounds of arrest must be informed in a language which the arrestee 
understands. That is how, in the case of Pankaj Bansal1, this Court 
held that the mode of conveying the grounds of arrest must necessarily 
be meaningful so as to serve the intended purpose. However, under 
Article 22(1), there is no requirement of communicating the grounds 
of arrest in writing. Article 22(1) also incorporates the right of every 
person arrested to consult an advocate of his choice and the right to be 
defended by an advocate. If the grounds of arrest are not communicated 
to the arrestee, as soon as may be, he will not be able to effectively 
exercise the right to consult an advocate. This requirement incorporated 
in Article 22(1) also ensures that the grounds for arresting the person 
without a warrant exist. Once a person is arrested, his right to liberty 
under Article 21 is curtailed. When such an important fundamental 
right is curtailed, it is necessary that the person concerned must 
understand on what grounds he has been arrested. That is why the 
mode of conveying information of the grounds must be meaningful 
so as to serve the objects stated above. 
14.	 Thus, the requirement of informing the person arrested of the 
grounds of arrest is not a formality but a mandatory constitutional 
requirement. Article 22 is included in Part III of the Constitution under 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
443
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
the heading of Fundamental Rights. Thus, it is the fundamental right 
of every person arrested and detained in custody to be informed 
of the grounds of arrest as soon as possible. If the grounds of 
arrest are not informed as soon as may be after the arrest, it 
would amount to a violation of the fundamental right of the arrestee 
guaranteed under Article 22(1). It will also amount to depriving the 
arrestee of his liberty. The reason is that, as provided in Article 21, 
no person can be deprived of his liberty except in accordance with 
the procedure established by law. The procedure established by 
law also includes what is provided in Article 22(1). Therefore, when 
a person is arrested without a warrant, and the grounds of arrest 
are not informed to him, as soon as may be, after the arrest, it will 
amount to a violation of his fundamental right guaranteed under 
Article 21 as well. In a given case, if the mandate of Article 22 is 
not followed while arresting a person or after arresting a person, 
it will also violate fundamental right to liberty guaranteed under 
Article 21, and the arrest will be rendered illegal. On the failure 
to comply with the requirement of informing grounds of arrest as 
soon as may be after the arrest, the arrest is vitiated. Once the 
arrest is held to be vitiated, the person arrested cannot remain in 
custody even for a second. 
15.	 We have already referred to what is held in paragraphs 42 and 43 of 
the decision in the case of Pankaj Bansal.1 This Court has suggested 
that the proper and ideal course of communicating the grounds of 
arrest is to provide grounds of arrest in writing. Obviously, before 
a police officer communicates the grounds of arrest, the grounds 
of arrest have to be formulated. Therefore, there is no harm if the 
grounds of arrest are communicated in writing. Although there is no 
requirement to communicate the grounds of arrest in writing, what 
is stated in paragraphs 42 and 43 of the decision in the case of 
Pankaj Bansal1 are suggestions that merit consideration. We are 
aware that in every case, it may not be practicable to implement 
what is suggested. If the course, as suggested, is followed, the 
controversy about the non-compliance will not arise at all. The police 
have to balance the rights of a person arrested with the interests of 
the society. Therefore, the police should always scrupulously comply 
with the requirements of Article 22.
16.	 An attempt was made by learned senior counsel appearing for 1st 
respondent to argue that after his arrest, the appellant was repeatedly 
remanded to custody, and now a chargesheet has been filed. His 
444
submission is that now, the custody of the appellant is pursuant to 
the order taking cognizance passed on the charge sheet. Accepting 
such arguments, with great respect to the learned senior counsel, 
will amount to completely nullifying Articles 21 and 22(1) of the 
Constitution. Once it is held that arrest is unconstitutional due 
to violation of Article 22(1), the arrest itself is vitiated. Therefore, 
continued custody of such a person based on orders of remand is 
also vitiated. Filing a charge sheet and order of cognizance will not 
validate an arrest which is per se unconstitutional, being violative of 
Articles 21 and 22(1) of the Constitution of India. We cannot tinker 
with the most important safeguards provided under Article 22. 
17.	 Another argument canvassed on behalf of the respondents is that 
even if the appellant is released on the grounds of violating Article 
22, the first respondent can arrest him again. At this stage, it is not 
necessary to decide the issue. 
18.	 In the present case, 1st respondent relied upon an entry in the case 
diary allegedly made at 6.10 p.m. on 10th June 2024, which records 
that the appellant was arrested after informing him of the grounds of 
arrest. For the reasons which will follow hereafter, we are rejecting 
the argument made by the 1st respondent. If the police want to prove 
communication of the grounds of arrest only based on a diary entry, it 
is necessary to incorporate those grounds of arrest in the diary entry 
or any other document. The grounds of arrest must exist before the 
same are informed. Therefore, in a given case, even assuming that 
the case of the police regarding requirements of Article 22(1) of the 
constitution is to be accepted based on an entry in the case diary, 
there must be a contemporaneous record, which records what the 
grounds of arrest were. When an arrestee pleads before a Court 
that grounds of arrest were not communicated, the burden to prove 
the compliance of Article 22(1) is on the police. 
19.	 An argument was sought to be canvassed that in view of sub-
Section (1) of Section 50 of CrPC, there is an option to communicate 
to the person arrested full particulars of the offence for which he 
is arrested or the other grounds for the arrest. Section 50 cannot 
have the effect of diluting the requirement of Article 22(1). If held 
so, Section 50 will attract the vice of unconstitutionality. Section 
50 lays down the requirement of communicating the full particulars 
of the offence for which a person is arrested to him. The ‘other 
grounds for such arrest’ referred to in Section 50(1) have nothing 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
445
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
to do with the grounds of arrest referred to in Article 22(1). The 
requirement of Section 50 is in addition to what is provided in Article 
22(1). Section 47 of the BNSS is the corresponding provision. 
Therefore, what we have held about Section 50 will apply to 
Section 47 of the BNSS. 
20.	 When an arrested person is produced before a Judicial Magistrate 
for remand, it is the duty of the Magistrate to ascertain whether 
compliance with Article 22(1) has been made. The reason is that 
due to non-compliance, the arrest is rendered illegal; therefore, the 
arrestee cannot be remanded after the arrest is rendered illegal. It 
is the obligation of all the Courts to uphold the fundamental rights. 
CONCLUSIONS
21.	 Therefore, we conclude: 
a)	
The requirement of informing a person arrested of grounds of 
arrest is a mandatory requirement of Article 22(1);
b)	
The information of the grounds of arrest must be provided to 
the arrested person in such a manner that sufficient knowledge 
of the basic facts constituting the grounds is imparted and 
communicated to the arrested person effectively in the language 
which he understands. The mode and method of communication 
must be such that the object of the constitutional safeguard is 
achieved;
c)	
When arrested accused alleges non-compliance with the 
requirements of Article 22(1), the burden will always be on 
the Investigating Officer/Agency to prove compliance with the 
requirements of Article 22(1);
d)	
Non-compliance with Article 22(1) will be a violation of the 
fundamental rights of the accused guaranteed by the said Article. 
Moreover, it will amount to a violation of the right to personal 
liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution. Therefore, 
non-compliance with the requirements of Article 22(1) vitiates 
the arrest of the accused. Hence, further orders passed by a 
criminal court of remand are also vitiated. Needless to add that 
it will not vitiate the investigation, charge sheet and trial. But, at 
the same time, filing of chargesheet will not validate a breach 
of constitutional mandate under Article 22(1); 
446
e)	
When an arrested person is produced before a Judicial 
Magistrate for remand, it is the duty of the Magistrate to ascertain 
whether compliance with Article 22(1) and other mandatory 
safeguards has been made; and
f)	
When a violation of Article 22(1) is established, it is the duty of 
the court to forthwith order the release of the accused. That will 
be a ground to grant bail even if statutory restrictions on the 
grant of bail exist. The statutory restrictions do not affect the 
power of the court to grant bail when the violation of Articles 
21 and 22 of the Constitution is established.
FACTUAL ADJUDICATION
22.	 In ground A of the writ petition filed before the High Court, a specific 
factual contention has been raised to the following effect:
“A. BECAUSE the arrest of the Petitioner dated 10.06.2024 
is patently illegal inasmuch the Petitioner was not provided 
with the grounds or reasons of arrest.
……………………………………………………………”
Even the same contention is raised in ground B very specifically 
and a further contention is raised due to non-compliance with the 
requirement of informing the appellant of the grounds of arrest, 
the appellant’s arrest is rendered illegal. The same is the ground 
specifically taken in ground E also. Thus, the appellant repeatedly 
pleaded violation of Article 22(1) by explicitly contending that he was 
not informed of the grounds of arrest. 
23.	 A status report/reply was filed by Shri Abhimanyu, Assistant 
Commissioner of Police before the High Court in response to the 
petition. The grounds taken in the writ petition regarding failure to 
communicate the grounds of arrest are not dealt with in the reply at 
all. It is merely mentioned that the appellant’s wife was informed about 
the arrest. Thus, it is not even pleaded before the High Court that 
grounds of arrest were communicated or informed to the appellant. 
24.	 It is pertinent to note the stand Shri Abhimanyu took while filing a 
reply to the present Special Leave Petition. He has described in 
detail how the appellant was arrested. Most pertinently in paragraph 
11, he stated thus:
“………………………………………………………..
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
447
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
The petitioner, thereafter, gave his phone to IO to make 
call at the mobile no. of his wife. The IO called from the 
phone of the petitioner and his wife immediately responded 
the phone call. Thus, when informing Petitioner’s wife 
about Petitioner’s arrest, the grounds of arrest were 
also explained to her in detail as per the provisions 
of Section 50A of CrPC. Further, when Petitioner’s wife 
came to meet the Petitioner, she was again explained 
the grounds of arrest in detail and shown the relevant 
documents.
………………..………………………………………”
(emphasis added)
Thus, the stand taken by Shri Abhimanyu is that the grounds of arrest 
were explained to the appellant’s wife in detail, and when she again 
came to meet the appellant, she was informed and explained the 
grounds of arrest. Thus, the stand taken shows that grounds of arrest 
were not informed to the appellant but to his wife. The contention 
that the appellant’s wife was informed about the grounds of arrest 
is an afterthought, as no such contention has been raised in the 
reply filed before the High Court. Communication of the grounds of 
arrest to the wife of the arrestee is no compliance with the mandate 
of Article 22(1). As the ground of non-compliance with Article 22(1) 
has been specifically pleaded in this appeal, this was the second 
opportunity available to the 1st respondent to plead and prove that 
grounds of arrest were informed to the appellant. However, it has 
not been done, and his contention is that the grounds of arrest were 
communicated to the appellant’s wife. 
25.	 A contention has been raised in the written argument that the 
grounds of arrest were incorporated in the remand report. This 
contention has been raised for the first time in written submissions 
before this Court. This is not pleaded in the reply filed before the 
High Court and this Court. The police submit a remand report before 
the learned Magistrate for seeking remand without serving a copy 
thereof to the arrestee. The reason is that the Police cannot divulge 
the details of the investigation to the accused till the final report is 
filed. Mentioning the grounds of arrest in the remand report is no 
compliance with the requirement of informing the arrestee of the 
grounds of arrest.
448
26.	 The stand taken before the High Court was that the appellant’s 
wife was informed about the arrest. Information about the arrest is 
completely different from the grounds of arrest. The grounds of arrest 
are different from the arrest memo. The arrest memo incorporates 
the name of the arrested person, his permanent address, present 
address, particulars of FIR and Section applied, place of arrest, date 
and time of arrest, the name of the officer arresting the accused and 
name, address and phone number of the person to whom information 
about arrest has been given. We have perused the arrest memo in 
the present case. The same contains only the information stated 
above and not the grounds of arrest. The information about the 
arrest is completely different from information about the grounds 
of arrest. Mere information of arrest will not amount to furnishing 
grounds of arrest.
27.	 Reliance was placed in this regard on the case diary entry of 10th 
June 2024 at 6.10 p.m., which records that the appellant was 
arrested after informing him of the grounds of arrest. This was not 
pleaded before the High Court as well as in this Court in the reply of 
1st respondent. This is an afterthought. Considering the stand taken 
in the reply filed before the High Court and this Court, only on the 
basis of a vague entry in the police diary, we cannot accept that 
compliance with Article 22(1) can be inferred. No contemporaneous 
documents have been put on record wherein the grounds of arrest 
have been noted. Therefore, reliance placed on the diary entries is 
completely irrelevant.
28.	 Therefore, in the facts of the case, we have no hesitation in holding 
that the arrest of the appellant was rendered illegal on account of 
failure to communicate the grounds of arrest to the appellant as 
mandated by Article 22(1) of the Constitution.
29.	 Before we part with this judgment, we must refer to the shocking 
treatment given to the appellant by the police. He was taken to a 
hospital while he was handcuffed and he was chained to the hospital 
bed. This itself is a violation of the fundamental right of the appellant 
under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The right to live with dignity 
is a part of the rights guaranteed under Article 21. We, therefore, 
propose to direct the State Government to issue necessary directions 
to ensure that such illegalities are never committed. 
30.	 We must refer to the reasons recorded by the High Court. Paragraph 
7 of the judgment notes the contention regarding failure to serve 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
449
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
grounds of arrest. Paragraph 9 of the impugned judgment reads thus:
“9.	 In the above said para, it has been explicitly 
mentioned that petitioner was informed regarding his 
arrest and after that he was produced before the Judicial 
Magistrate, who had given the seven days police custody 
for conducting investigation. The allegations about non-
supply of arrest, is simply bald. The analysis of above, 
would clearly point out that there is no violation of Article 
22(1) of Constitution of India because there is nothing to 
disbelieve that petitioner was not informed about ground 
of arrest.”
31.	 The learned Single Judge, unfortunately, has equated information 
given regarding the appellant’s arrest with the grounds of arrest. 
The observation that the allegation of non-supply of the grounds 
of arrest made by the appellant is a bald allegation is completely 
uncalled for. All courts, including the High Court, have a duty to 
uphold fundamental rights. Once a violation of a fundamental 
right under Article 22(1) was alleged, it was the duty of the High 
Court to go into the said contention and decide in one way or the 
other. When a violation of Article 22(1) is alleged with respect to 
grounds of arrest, there can be possible two contentions raised: 
(a) that the arrested person was not informed of the grounds of 
arrest, or (b) purported information of grounds of arrest does 
not contain any ground of arrest. As far as the first contention is 
concerned, the person who is arrested can discharge his burden 
by simply alleging that grounds of arrest were not informed to him. 
If such an allegation is made in the pleadings, the entire burden 
is on the arresting agency or the State to satisfy the court that 
effective compliance was made with the requirement of Article 
22(1). Therefore, the view taken by the High Court is completely 
erroneous. 
32.	 In view of the above findings, we are not deciding the issue of 
violation of Article 22(2) of the Constitution. 
33.	 Hence, the appeal is allowed, and we pass the following order:
a)	
The arrest of the appellant shown on 10th June 2024 in 
connection with FIR no.121 of 2023 dated 25th March 2023 
registered at Police Station DLF, Sector-29, Gurugram stands 
vitiated;
450
b)	
Therefore, the appellant shall be forthwith released and set at 
liberty;
c)	
We clarify that the finding of this Court that the arrest of 
the appellant stands vitiated will not affect the merits of the 
chargesheet and the pending case;
d)	
We direct the appellant to regularly and punctually attend the 
trial court unless his presence is exempted, and cooperate 
with the trial court for early disposal of the trial. We direct the 
appellant to furnish a bond in accordance with Section 91 of 
the BNSS to the satisfaction of the Trial Court within a period 
of two weeks from his release ; 
e)	
The State of Haryana shall issue guidelines/departmental 
instructions to the police (i) to ensure that the act of handcuffing 
an accused while he is on a hospital bed and tying him to the 
hospital bed is not committed again. (ii) to ensure that the 
constitutional safeguards under Article 22 are strictly followed. 
If necessary, the State Government shall amend the existing 
Rules/guidelines; and
f)	
A copy of the judgment shall be forwarded to the Home Secretary 
of the State of Haryana.
Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, J.
1.	
I had the benefit of going through the draft opinion of my esteemed 
Brother Hon’ble Mr. Justice Abhay S. Oka and I concur with the 
analysis and conclusions arrived at. However, I wish to add a few 
lines in supplement to the aforesaid opinion.
2.	
The issue on the requirement of communication of grounds of 
arrest to the person arrested, as mandated under Article 22(1) of 
the Constitution of India, which has also been incorporated in the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 under Section 19 thereof 
has been succinctly reiterated in this judgment. The constitutional 
mandate of informing the grounds of arrest to the person arrested in 
writing has been explained in the case of Pankaj Bansal (supra) so 
as to be meaningful to serve the intended purpose which has been 
reiterated in Prabir Purkayastha (supra). The said constitutional 
mandate has been incorporated in the statute under Section 50 of the 
CrPC (Section 47 of BNSS). It may also be noted that the aforesaid 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
451
Vihaan Kumar v. State of Haryana & Anr.
provision of requirement for communicating the grounds of arrest, to 
be purposeful, is also required to be communicated to the friends, 
relatives or such other persons of the accused as may be disclosed 
or nominated by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such 
information as provided under Section 50A of the CrPC. As may be 
noted, this is in the addition of the requirement as provided under 
Section 50(1) of the CrPC.
3.	
The purpose of inserting Section 50A of the CrPC, making it obligatory 
on the person making arrest to inform about the arrest to the friends, 
relatives or persons nominated by the arrested person, is to ensure 
that they would able to take immediate and prompt actions to 
secure the release of the arrested person as permissible under the 
law. The arrested person, because of his detention, may not have 
immediate and easy access to the legal process for securing his 
release, which would otherwise be available to the friends, relatives 
and such nominated persons by way of engaging lawyers, briefing 
them to secure release of the detained person on bail at the earliest. 
Therefore, the purpose of communicating the grounds of arrest to 
the detenue, and in addition to his relatives as mentioned above is 
not merely a formality but to enable the detained person to know the 
reasons for his arrest but also to provide the necessary opportunity 
to him through his relatives, friends or nominated persons to secure 
his release at the earliest possible opportunity for actualising the 
fundamental right to liberty and life as guaranteed under Article 21 
of the Constitution. Hence, the requirement of communicating the 
grounds of arrest in writing is not only to the arrested person, but also 
to the friends, relatives or such other person as may be disclosed 
or nominated by the arrested person, so as to make the mandate 
of Article 22(1) of the Constitution meaningful and effective failing 
which, such arrest may be rendered illegal.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan