[2025] 1 S.C.R. 592 : 2025 INSC 93
Sadashiv Dhondiram Patil 
v. 
The State of Maharashtra
(Criminal Appeal No. 1718 of 2017) 
09 January 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan, JJ]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether Village Police Patil is a Police Officer in terms 
of s. 25 of the Evidence Act; and whether the High Court erred in 
holding the appellant guilty of the offence of murder.
Headnotes†
Evidence Act, 1872 – ss.25, 106 – Extra judicial confession – 
Admissibility – Extra judicial confession to Police Patil, 
if admissible – Appellant-husband charged for the murder 
of his wife – Extra judicial confession allegedly made by the 
appellant to the village Police Patil – Trial court acquitted 
the accused for the offence punishable u/ss.302 and 201 
IPC holding that extra judicial confession allegedly made by 
the appellant to Village Police Patil was inadmissible as per  
s.25 – High Court set aside the acquittal and held the appellant 
guilty of the offence of murder – Correctness: 
Held: Police Patil of the Village cannot be termed as a Police 
Officer for the purpose of s.25 – Extra-judicial confession alleged 
to have been made by the accused before village Police Patil is 
admissible in evidence and is not hit by s.25 – However, such 
extra-judicial confession should be found to be true and trustworthy 
before it is relied upon by the Court to hold the accused guilty – 
Extra-judicial confession should also be found to be free of any 
inducement, coercion etc. and should be shown to have been 
made by the accused on his own free will and volition – What 
is alleged to have been conveyed cannot be said to be an 
extra- judicial confession – Very omnibus and vague statement 
seems to have been made – High Court erred in relying upon 
the extra-judicial confession even while rightly holding that the 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
593
Sadashiv Dhondiram Patil v. The State of Maharashtra
same was admissible in evidence as Village Police Patil cannot 
be said to be a Police Officer – Panch witnesses did not support 
the prosecution case – Just because the panch witnesses have 
turned hostile does not mean that such discovery should be 
disbelieved – However, I.O. cannot be said to be proving the 
contents of the panchnama in accordance with law and the 
circumstance of discovery cannot be relied upon – Motive cannot 
be the sole basis for convicting the accused – Prosecution has to 
prove its case beyond reasonable doubt – Initial burden of proof 
is always on the prosecution – However, in cases where husband 
is alleged to have killed his wife in the night hours and that too 
within the residential house, then undoubtedly the husband has 
to offer some explanation as to what had actually happened and 
if he fails to offer any plausible explanation, this can go against 
him – Prosecution has to first lay the foundational facts before 
it seeks to invoke s.106 – It cannot straightaway invoke s.106 
and throw the entire burden on the accused to establish his 
innocence – In view thereof, the High Court erred in holding the 
appellant guilty of the offence of murder – Impugned judgment 
set aside – Penal Code, 1860 – ss.302, 201. [Paras 27, 31,  
36-38, 42, 47-49, 50-51, 55, 56, 58]
Case Law Cited
Rajeshwer S/o Hiraman Mohurle v. State of Maharashtra (2009) 
Criminal Law Journal 3816; C.K. Ravindra v. the State of Kerala 
[1999] Supp. 5 SCR 140 : AIR 2000 SC 369; Ram Singh v. the 
State of Maharashtra & Anr (1999) Criminal Law Journal 3763; 
Balwinder Singh v. State of Punjab (1995) Supplementary 4 SCC 
259 – referred to.
List of Acts
Evidence Act, 1872; Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973; Maharashtra Village Police Act, 1967.
List of Keywords
Extra judicial confession; Admissibility of extra judicial confession 
to Police Patil; Police Patil, if termed as a Police Officer; Panch 
witnesses; Motive.
594
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1718 of 2017
From the Judgment and Order dated 03.07.2015 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in CRLA No. 70 of 1994
Appearances for Parties
Sachin Patil, Geo Joseph, Risvi Muhammed, Rishabh Agarwal, 
Advs. for the Appellant.
Aniruddha Joshi, Sr. Adv., Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Aaditya 
Aniruddha Pande, Advs. for the Respondent.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
This appeal arises from the Judgment and Order passed by the 
High Court of Judicature at Bombay dated 3-7-2015 in Criminal 
Appeal No.70/94 by which the High Court allowed the acquittal 
appeal filed by the State of Maharashtra and thereby set aside 
the Judgment of the Additional Sessions Judge, Kolhapur dated 
13-7-1993 in Sessions Case No.48/91 acquitting the appellant - 
herein (original accused) for the offence punishable under 
Sections 302 and 201 respectively of the Indian Penal Code (for 
short, the “IPC”).
2.	
The case of the prosecution may be summarized as under:-
The deceased by name Lata was married to the appellant herein. 
A son was born in the wedlock. However, it appears that marital life 
was not happy. The appellant – herein was entertaining a doubt in 
his mind as regards the chastity of his wife. One day all of a sudden, 
the deceased went missing.
3.	
In such circumstances, the maternal uncle of the deceased by name – 
Yashwant Ganpati Patil (PW 5) went to the house of Village Police 
Patial by name Mr. Vasant Dattu Bhosale & informed him that his 
niece had gone missing.
4.	
It appears that on 20-10-1990 at about 9.30 p.m. PW 5 brought to 
the notice to PW 2 that his niece Lata was missing.	
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
595
Sadashiv Dhondiram Patil v. The State of Maharashtra
5.	
The PW – 2, being the Village Police Patil, visited the house of the 
appellant – herein and found that the dead-body of the deceased 
lying in one corner of the house. The materials on record further 
indicate that the brother of the appellant – herein by name Madhukar 
and his wife Laxmi (PW 4) along with their daughter Mangal (PW 3) 
were also residing in the same house but separately in one part.
6.	
Upon recovery of the dead-body of the deceased, the inquest 
panchnama was drawn. The body of the deceased was sent for 
postmortem examination. The postmortem examination report noted 
that the cause of death was asphyxia due to strangulation. It is the 
case of the prosecution that the appellant – herein strangulated his 
wife to death with the help of an iron rod.
7.	
This iron rod is also stated to have been discovered from the place 
of the incident itself by way of a discovery panchnama drawn by the 
Investigating Officer in the presence of the panch witnesses.
8.	
The appellant was arrested in connection with the First Information 
Report that came to be lodged by the PW-2 himself at the concerned 
Police Station for the offence of murder.
9.	
Upon completion of investigation, the Investigating Officer filed 
charge-sheet for the offence enumerated above.
10.	 The case being exclusively triable by a Sessions Judge came to be 
committed to the Court of Sessions.	
	
11.	 The Trial Court framed charge vide order dated 20.02.1993 which 
reads thus:
“CHARGE
I, V. B. Deshmukh, 4th Additional Sessions Judge, Kolhapur 
hereby charge you accused.
Shri. Sadashiv Dhondiram Patil, Age-33 years, Resident 
of Takali, Tal. Shirol, Dist. Kolhapur as follows:- 
That you accused on or about 25.10.1990 at about 1.00 
a.m. at Mouje Sainik Takali, Tal. Shirol, Dist. Kolhapur 
did commit murder of your wife Sou. Lata Sadashiv Patil,  
Age-25 years by pressing her neck and thereby committed 
an offence punishable section 302 of the Indian Penal 
Code.
596
Secondly that you on aforesaid date, time and place 
knowingly that certain offence, to wit that you committed 
murder of your wife by pressing her neck and offence 
punishable with death or imprisonment for life has been 
committed, did cause of certain evidence of the said 
offence to disappear to wit. that you put the dead body of 
your wife in a gunny bag and thrown in the (iso) where the 
food-grains are preserved with an intention to screening 
yourself from legal punishment and thereby committed an 
offence punishable under section 201 of the Indian Penal 
code, and within my cognizance.
And, hereby I direct you that you be tried by me on 
aforesaid charges.
Today this 20th day of February, 1993 at Kolhapur.
(V.B.Deshmukh),
4th Additional Sessions Judge,
Kolhapur..”
12.	 In the course of the trial, the prosecution examined the following 
witnesses:-	
	
1.	
Mr. Yeshvant Govind Chavan Exhibit 13
2.	
Mr. Vasant Dattu Bhosale (Patil) Exhibit 16
3.	
Ms. Mangal Exhibit 19
4.	
Ms. Laxmi wife of Madhukar Patil Exhibit 20
5.	
Mr. Yashvant Ganapati Patil Exhibit 21
6.	
Mr. Yamnappa Bhimrao Murali Exhibit 22
7.	
Mr. Amrut Rama Mane Exhibit 24
8.	
Dr. Shashikant Lakshman Pawar Exhibit 32
13.	 The prosecution also relied upon the following pieces of documentary 
evidence:-
1.	
First Information Report (Exhibit 17)
2.	
Inquest Panchnama (Exhibit 8)
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
597
Sadashiv Dhondiram Patil v. The State of Maharashtra
3.	
Spot Panchnama (Exhibit 10)
4.	
Arrest Panchnama (Exhibit 11)
5.	
Memorandum of the Statement of accused  
(Exhibit 14)
6.	
Seizure punchnama of iron-rod, Article No.1  
(Exhibit 15)
7.	
Seizure punchnama of the clothes of the deceased 
(Exhibit 12)
8.	
The Memorandum of Post-mortem examination 
(Exhibit 33)
9.	
Advance Medical Certificate (Exhibit 9)
10.	 Seven photographs (Exhibit 37 to 43)
14.	 Upon closure of the recording of the evidence, the further statement 
of the appellant – herein was recorded under Section 313 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
15.	 In the further statement, the appellant stated as under:-
Q.75 Do you want to say anything more about your 
defence?
Answer : I am giving written statement.
WRITTEN STATEMENT OF THE ACCUSED  
UNDER SECTION 313 of Cr. P.C.
Few months prior to death of my wife, I became disciple 
of Shri Rane of Shirol. He told me not to sleep at home 
for 6 months. Therefore I use to stay at night generally at 
Shirol. If I am at Takali, then I use to sleep at Kalleshwar 
temple. 2-3 days prior to missing of my wife from the 
home, I was at Shirol. When I returned on Thursday or 
Friday, I came to know about missing of my wife from the 
home. I enquired with, her maternal uncle, but she did not 
go there. I am implicated in the present case only on the 
basis of doubt.
16.	 The Trial Court upon appreciation of the oral as well as the 
documentary evidence on record came to the conclusion that the 
598
prosecution had failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. 
The Trial Court accordingly acquitted the appellant – herein.
17.	 It may not be out of place to state that at this stage that the Trial 
Court looked into only one piece of circumstance, i.e., the extra 
judicial confession alleged to have been made by the appellant – 
herein before the (PW 2), i.e., the village Police Patil in the presence 
of his sister-in-law (PW 4) – Laxmi. 
18.	 It is also important to note that Madhukar (brother of the accused) 
passed away during the course of trial and he could not have been 
examined as one of the prosecution witnesses.
19.	 The Trial Court took the view that the extra-judicial confession alleged 
to have been by the appellant – herein before (PW 2) could not be 
said to be admissible in evidence being hit by Section 25 of the 
Indian Evidence Act.
20.	 The Trial Court also disbelieved the discovery of the iron rod under 
Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act.
21.	 The State, being dissatisfied with the Judgment and Order of acquittal 
passed by the Trial Court, went in appeal before the High Court.
22.	 The High Court reversed the acquittal and held the appellant – herein 
guilty of the offence of murder and accordingly sentenced him to 
undergo life imprisonment.
23.	 In such circumstances, referred to above, the appellant is here before 
this Court with the present appeal.
24.	 We have heard Mr. Sachin Patil, the learned counsel appearing for 
the appellant and Mr. Aniruddha Joshi, the learned Senior counsel 
appearing for the respondent – State.
25.	 We take notice of the fact that the entire case hinges on circumstantial 
evidence. The High Court relied upon the four pieces of incriminating 
evidence for the purpose of holding the accused guilty of the offence 
of murder of his wife:-
(i)	
extra-judicial confession alleged to have been made by the 
appellant before (PW 2) on 29-10-1990
(ii)	
discovery of the weapon of offence, i.e., the iron rod;
(iii)	 motive to commit crime;
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
599
Sadashiv Dhondiram Patil v. The State of Maharashtra
(iv)	 the incident occurred inside the house and, therefore, the 
appellant could be said to be within the special knowledge as 
to what had happened on the fateful day of the incident.
26.	 The High Court while reversing the acquittal invoked Section 106 
of the Evidence Act and shifted the burden on the appellant – 
herein to establish or rather explain what exactly had happened 
with his wife.
27.	 It appears that when the Trial Court acquitted the appellant – herein, 
the position of law as regards the admissibility of an extra-judicial 
confession said to have been made before the Village Police Patil 
was something different. A Division Bench of the High Court in 
“Ram Singh vs. the State of Maharashtra & Anr” (1999) Criminal 
Law Journal 3763 had held that a village Police Patil is a Police 
officer and, therefore, any confession made to him is inadmissible 
in evidence in view of Section 25 of the Evidence Act.
28.	 In the said Judgment, the Division Bench also looked into & discussed 
Section 14 of the Maharashtra Village Police Act, 1967, under which 
a Police Patil is appointed.
29.	 We quote the relevant observations of the said Judgment as under:-
13. Section 14 of the Maharashtra Village Police Act, 1967, 
provides inter alia:
“(1) The Police Patil shall apprehend any person within 
the limits of his village who he may have reason to believe 
has committed any serious offence, and shall forward 
such person, together with all articles likely to be useful 
as evidence, to the Station Officer.
(2) Every person so apprehended shall within 24 hours 
be produced before the nearest Magistrate, excluding the 
time necessary for the journey from the place where he is 
apprehended to the Court of the Magistrate.”
14. Sub-section (1) of S. 13 of the Maharashtra Village 
Police Act, 1967, provides:
“The Police Patil shall forthwith proceed to the place of incident 
and call upon two or more intelligent persons belonging 
to the village or neighbourhood, who shall investigate the 
causes of death and all the circumstances of the case, and 
600
make a written report of the same, which the Police Patil 
shall cause to be forthwith delivered to the Station Officer.” 
15. Section 15 of the Maharashtra Village Police Act, 1967, 
provides inter alia:
“(1) The Police Patil, in making any investigation coming 
within the scope of his duty, shall have authority to call 
and examine witnesses, and record their statement, and 
to search for concealed articles, taking care that no search 
be made in a dwelling-house between sunset and sunrise 
without urgent occasion.
(2) The Police Patil shall also have authority, in carrying out 
any search or any pursuit of supposed criminal, to enter 
and act within the limits of other villages, being bound 
however to have immediate information to the Police 
Patil thereof, who shall afford him all the assistance in his 
power, and be immediately responsible for continuing the 
search and pursuit.”
16. On plain reading of these provisions under the 
Maharashtra Village Police Act, 1967, it will be clear that 
the Police Patil has power to apprehend a person, if he 
suspects that a person has committed serious offence. He 
has to send report to the Police Station and the person 
is required to be produced within 24 hours from the time 
and Police Patil apprehend such person. Not only that a 
preliminary investigation with respect to such crime also 
can be made by the Police Patil and he can even chase the 
accused and apprehend the accused. So, it is obvious that 
the observations of the learned Additional Sessions Judge 
quoted above are made without reading the appropriate 
provisions. Before making any such observations in the 
judgment, the Judge, at least, of the cadre of Additional 
Sessions Judge, is expected to go through the relevant 
provisions of law. Sweeping observations should not be 
made just to boost the reasoning which is being given in 
the judgment.
17. In the light of the provisions of the Maharashtra Village 
Police Act, 1967, it has to be seen whether any confession 
made before the Police Patil is hit by Section 25 of the 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
601
Sadashiv Dhondiram Patil v. The State of Maharashtra
Evidence Act. The powers of the Police Patil which are 
referred to above clearly indicate that when any offence 
takes place, he can act as a Police Officer. He is not a 
mere spectator or informant. So, for all practical purposes, 
he is a Police Officer and, therefore, any confession made 
before the Police Patil would become inadmissible in 
evidence as being made before a Police Officer.
18. In this respect, we would like to refer two rulings of our 
High Court. The first is, in the case of Queen Empress v. 
Bhima ((1894) ILR 17 Bom 485), and the other is in the case 
of Vistari Narayan Shebe v. The State of Maharashtra 1978 
Cri LJ 891. It is observed in the case of Vistari Narayan 
Shebe by the Division Bench, as follows (at page 895):
“In our opinion, it is fairly well established that the police 
patil is a police officer within the meaning of Sec. 25 of 
the Evidence Act. As early as in 1893 this Court held in 
Queen Empress v. Bhima ((1894) ILR 17 Bom 485), that 
a police patil is a police officer within the meaning of Ss. 
25 and 26 of the Indian Evidence Act. A confession made 
to a police patil is inadmissible in evidence. It must be 
remembered that the words “a police officer” found in S. 25 
of the Indian Evidence Act should not be read in any strict 
technical sense but according to its more comprehensive 
and more popular meaning. Nor is the term confined to 
a person actually in charge of investigating the offence 
under the Cr. P.С.”
19. Thus, it will be very clear that any confessional 
statement made by the accused before the Police Patil is not 
admissible in evidence. If the learned Additional Sessions 
Judge had considered this aspect in that perspective, he 
would not have relied upon the evidence of the Police 
Patil to hold that the extra judicial confession made by 
the accused before the Police Patil could be sufficient to 
convict the accused. The deposition of the Police Patil as 
well as the F.I.R. which include this confessional statement 
are inadmissible in evidence and, therefore, this evidence 
brought on record by the prosecution has to be excluded 
altogether”.
602
30.	 In the year 2009, a Full Bench of the Bombay High Court, answered 
a reference titled “Rajeshwer S/o Hiraman Mohurle vs. State of 
Maharashtra” reported in (2009) Criminal Law Journal 3816. The 
Full Bench was called upon to answer whether a Village Police Patil 
is a Police Officer within the meaning of Section 25 of the Evidence 
Act or not.
31.	 The Full Bench of the High Court overruled the above referred Division 
Bench Judgment and took the view that a Village Police Patil is not 
a Police Officer within the meaning of Section 25 of the Evidence 
Act and any confession made before him would be admissible in 
evidence as an extra-judicial confession. We may quote the relevant 
paragraphs of the said Full-Bench Judgment as under:-
“18. Upon objective analysis of the principles aforestated, 
it can be stated with some certainty that merely because a 
person is appointed to a post which vests him with limited 
powers of Investigation and inquiry or any power ancillary 
thereto or empowers him to prevent commission of crime 
in an area would not per se make him a Police Officer in 
law so as to attract the bar contained in section 25 of the 
Evidence Act. We have already noticed in some detail 
that the powers vested in Police Patil under the Village 
Police Act are expected to be exercised for performance 
of duties and functions stated under section 6 of that Act. 
The duties and functions of the Police Patil are of a very 
restricted nature and do not vest in him all the powers 
including the power to file a charge-sheet under section 173 
of the Criminal Procedure Code which a Police Officer 
under the Code possess. On the contrary, he is expected 
to assist the Police Officers when called upon by them 
in performance of their duties. He has to act under the 
orders of the District Magistrate and even is expected to 
collect and communicate to the Station Officer intelligence 
affecting the public peace. The basic and primary distinction 
between the powers of the Police Officer under the Code 
and the power and duties of the Police Patil under the 
Village Police Act, is that while the investigating officer or 
Police Officer in charge of a Police Station is duty bound 
in, law to conduct inquiry or, investigation in a just, proper 
and fair manner independently being uninfluenced by 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
603
Sadashiv Dhondiram Patil v. The State of Maharashtra
any other facts. There the restricted duties and powers 
relating to investigation and even otherwise vested in the 
Police Patil are to be exercised under the supervision of 
higher authorities as indicated in the provisions of the 
Village Police Act. Police Patil is required to perform his 
functions and discharge his duties subject to the orders 
of the Magistrate and is also required to assist and help 
the Police Officers in discharge of their duties. In these 
circumstances, it will be a far fetched submission that 
the Police Patil has to be treated as a Police Officer in 
law for all intent and purposes. The consistent view of 
the Supreme Court as is evident from the above referred 
judgments is that the officer, other than a police officer, 
invested with powers of an officer -In-charge of a Police 
Station is not entitled, to exercise all the powers under 
Chapter XII of the Code Including the power to submit a 
report or charge-sheet/challan under section 173 of the 
Code. This feature has been the hallmark and is held to 
be determinative factor by the Supreme Court. Once this 
aspect is missing from the ambit of the powers vested in 
the officer, he cannot be stated to be a Police Officer for 
the purposes of section 25 of the Indian Evidence Act. 
The Police Patil under the Village Police Act is also not a 
Police Officer on the deeming fiction of law as there is no 
provision in the Statute which specifically or even otherwise 
requires the Police Patil to be treated as a Police Officer 
for all intent and purpose. 
19. It will be useful to refer to the reasoning recorded 
by the Supreme Court in the case of Badku Joti Savant 
(supra) even at the cost of repetition. In paragraph 9 while 
discussing section 21 of the Central Excise Act which 
states that a Central Excise Officer under the Act has all 
the powers of an officer in-charge of a Police Station under 
Chapter XIV of the Criminal Procedure Code, the Court 
rejected the contention that therefore he should be deemed 
to be a Police Officer within the meaning of section 25 of 
the Evidence Act. Reference was made to the provisions 
of section 78(3) of the Bihar and Orissa Excise Act, 1955 
and section 77 of that Act which stated that Excise Officer 
empowered under the provisions shall be deemed to be 
604
the officer in-charge of a Police Station and shall have the 
power of such officer to investigate a cognizable case. But 
even there the Supreme Court held that this power does 
not include the power to submit a charge-sheet under 
section 173 of the Criminal Procedure Code under the 
Excise Act unlike the Bihar and Orissa Act and thus held 
that Central Excise Officer is not an officer deemed to be 
in-charge of a Police Station. In other words, the Supreme 
Court declined to accept the applicability of the deemed 
fiction of law to the extent of terming the Central Excise 
Officer as a Police Officer for the purpose of section 25 
of the Evidence Act.
20. The distinction between the powers of investigation 
given to a Police Officer under the Code and that of a 
Police Patil under the Village Police Act is quite obvious 
from the provisions of the two Statutes. Police Patil has 
been vested with very limited powers that too under the 
control and for the benefit of the Executive Magistrate/
Police Officer and his duties are primarily to ensure that 
offences and public nuisance are not committed in the 
village and to bring the offenders to justice. The expression 
“bringing the offenders to justice” appearing in section 6 of 
the Village Police Act along with its other provisions has to 
be given its normal and plain meaning. There is no need, 
keeping in view the scheme of the Act or the legislative 
intent, to expand the meaning of this expression and 
enlarge the scope of provisions of this section on certain 
presumption of law. The powers of the Police Patil as stated 
under section 13 to 15 of the Village Police Act, are to 
be read and construed ejusdem generis to the provisions 
of section 6. The bare reading of these provisions show 
that Police Patil is not vested with the powers of preparing 
and filing a charge-sheet before the Court of competent 
jurisdiction. The powers of Police Patil to investigate and 
control over the apprehended persons are very limited in 
contradistinction to powers of a Police Officer under the 
Code. In terms of section 156 of the Code, a Police Officer 
is vested with the power to investigate any cognizable case 
under the provisions of Chapter XIII even without orders 
of the Magistrate. On the other hand, when a Police Patil 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
605
Sadashiv Dhondiram Patil v. The State of Maharashtra
apprehends a person in exercise of his powers vested 
under section 14(i) of the Village Police Act, he has to 
forward such person to the Station Officer, who in turn shall 
produce such person before the Magistrate within twenty 
four hours. Thus Legislative intent behind section 6 appears 
to be that Police Patil is a person responsible primarily 
for village surveillance, prevention of crime and providing 
his assistance and help to the police in discharge of his 
duties. Even above all this, his duties and functions have 
been made subject to orders of the District Magistrate. The 
Police Patil does not enjoy absolute freedom in relation 
to investigation, apprehending the suspect and even in 
exercise of other powers vested in him under law. The 
powers to be exercised and duties and functions to be 
performed by him are under the supervisory control of the 
stated authorities. The duties, functions and powers vested 
in an authority by a Statute are relatable to the source 
which prescribes such functions and powers. The ambit, 
scope and effect of exercise of such power can be tested 
by two different concepts i.e. quo modo and actio quaelibet 
it suia via. In what manner the powers are to be exercised 
as per the prescribed procedure, the performance or action 
must follow its prescribed procedure. On applying the 
above stated principles and testing them with reference to 
the maxims stated (supra), it is not possible for the Court 
to hold that either the manner of functions and powers of 
Police Patil or method in which they are to be performed 
are equitable to the authority, powers and functions of a 
Police Officer, in law. Therefore, we are unable to contribute 
to the view that Police Patil is a Police Officer in law for 
all intent and purpose and confession before him would 
attract the bar contemplated under section 25 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872.
21. In view of our above discussion, now we proceed to 
record the answer to the question of law framed by the 
Division Bench. Our answer is as follows:-
“We are of the considered view that the Police Patil 
appointed under the Maharashtra Village Police Act, 1967 
is not a ‘Police Officer’ for the purposes of section 25 of 
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872”.
606
32.	 It appears that the High Court while reversing the acquittal relied upon 
the above-referred Full Bench Decision for the purpose of taking the 
view that the extra-judicial confession made by the appellant – herein 
before PW 2 could be said to be admissible in evidence.
33.	 One interesting question that arises for our consideration at this 
stage is that at the relevant point of time i.e., in 1993 when the Trial 
Court acquitted the appellant – herein the position of law was that an 
extra-judicial confession said to have been made by an accused 
before a village Police Patil could be said to be inadmissible in 
evidence being hit by Section 25 of the Evidence Act.
34.	 In the year 2009, the Full Bench of the Bombay High Court while 
answering a reference held that a Village Police Patil is not a Police 
Officer. Therefore, if the accused herein had stood acquitted having 
regard to the position of law prevailing at the relevant point of time 
then relying on a subsequent decision taking a contrary view whether 
the accused could have been held guilty?
35.	 It could be argued that the Full Bench decision of the Bombay High 
Court came to be delivered in the year 2009 whereas the appellant 
was acquitted by the Trial Court sometime in the year 1993. The 
position of law till 2009 was that a Village Police is a Police Officer 
and therefore, any confession made to him would be inadmissible in 
evidence in view of Section 25 of the Evidence Act, more particularly 
in view of the Division Bench decision of the Bombay High Court 
rendered in Ram Singh (supra). We do not propose to consider the 
question whether the High Court could have relied upon the Full Bench 
decision after the appellant came to be acquitted by the Trial Court 
in 1993 thereby giving retrospective effect as regards its applicability. 
36.	 We proceed on the footing that PW 2 – Vasant Dattu Bhosale, 
Police Patil of the Village cannot be termed as a Police Officer for 
the purpose of Section 25 of the Evidence Act. We also proceed on 
the footing that the extra-judicial confession alleged to have been 
made by the accused before PW 2 is admissible in evidence and 
is not hit by Section 25 of the Evidence Act. However, such extra-
judicial confession should be found to be true & trustworthy before 
it is relied upon by the Court to hold the accused guilty.
37.	 Besides, the above such extra-judicial confession should also be 
found to be free of any inducement, coercion etc. and it should be 
shown to have been made by the accused on his own free will and 
volition.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
607
Sadashiv Dhondiram Patil v. The State of Maharashtra
38.	 We requested the learned counsel appearing for the State to show 
us from the oral evidence on record, more particularly, the deposition 
of PW 2 as well as the deposition of PW 5, the exact words alleged 
to have been uttered by the appellant – herein in the form of an 
extra-judicial confession. 
39.	 We on our own also looked into and are convinced that what is 
alleged to have been conveyed cannot be said to be an extra-judicial 
confession. A very omnibus & vague statement seems to have been 
made as deposed by both the witnesses in their oral evidence. 
40.	 This Court in “C.K. Ravindra vs. the State of Kerala” AIR 2000 SC 
369 had held that before placing reliance upon the extra-judicial 
confession, the Court must be convinced as regards the exact words 
or even the words as nearly as possible. This Court took the view 
that it would be difficult to rely upon the extra-judicial confession if 
the exact words or even the words as nearly as possible have not 
been reproduced, the said statement cannot be said to be voluntary. 
In such circumstances, the same may have to be excluded from the 
purview of consideration.
41.	 This Court in “Balwinder Singh vs. State of Punjab” (1995) 
Supplementary 4 SCC 259 had held that an extra-judicial confession 
by its very nature is rather a weak type of evidence and requires 
appreciation with a great deal of care and caution. Where extra-
judicial confession is surrounded by suspicious circumstances, its 
credibility becomes doubtful and would lose its importance.
42.	 In such circumstances, referred to above, we are of the view that the 
High Court fell in error in relying upon the extra-judicial confession 
even while rightly holding that the same was admissible in evidence 
as Village Police Patil cannot be said to be a Police Officer.
43.	 We now come to the second piece of the circumstance relied upon.
44.	 It is the case of the prosecution that after the arrest of the appellant – 
herein, he is said to have on his own free will and volition made a 
statement before the Investigating Officer and he was ready and 
willing to point out the place where he had concealed the weapon, 
i.e., the iron rod.
45.	 Accordingly, the Investigating Officer along with two independent 
witnesses in the form of panchas went to the place as led by the 
appellant – herein.
608
46.	 The place was the house itself where the incident had occurred. 
According to the Investigating Officer, the appellant pointed out the 
iron rod which was lying in one corner of the house. The same was 
seized in the presence of the panch witnsses and was sent to the 
Forensic Science Laboratory for chemical analysis.
47.	 In this regard, we may only say that panch witnesses have not 
supported the case of the prosecution. They failed to prove the 
contents of the discovery panchnama.
48.	 If the panch witnesses are declared hostile then the prosecution 
is obliged to prove the contents of the said discovery panchnama 
through the evidence of the Investigating Officer. The question is 
how is the I.O. expected to prove the contents of the panchnama.
49.	 The position of law in this regard is very clear. Just because the panch 
witnesses have turned hostile does not mean that such discovery 
should be disbelieved. From the plain reading of the oral evidence 
of the Investigating Officer if the discovery is believable and inspires 
confidence, the same can definitely be looked into as one of the 
incriminating pieces of evidence against the accused. 
50.	 However, unfortunately in the case on hand, all that the I.O. did 
was to depose that he had drawn the panchnama and in the end 
identified his signature on the same and that of the panch witnesses. 
This cannot be said to be proving the contents of the panchnama 
in accordance with law. In such circumstances, the circumstance of 
discovery also cannot be relied upon.
51.	 We are now left with motive. Motive is a double-edged weapon. 
Motive cannot be the sole basis for convicting the accused and that 
too for a serious offence like murder. Motive may be considered along 
with other pieces of reliable evidence in the form of incriminating 
circumstances.
52.	 We now come to the last part of the matter.
53.	 The learned counsel appearing for the State submitted that the 
dead body of the deceased was recovered from the house itself, 
i.e., the place where the family was residing. He would submit that 
in normal circumstances, the husband could be said to be the best 
person to explain as to what had happened to his wife on the date 
of the incident.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
609
Sadashiv Dhondiram Patil v. The State of Maharashtra
54.	 According to the learned counsel, when an offence is committed 
within the four walls of the house and that too in secrecy, it is difficult 
for the prosecution to establish its case beyond reasonable doubt 
and, therefore, under Section 106 of the Evidence Act, it is for the 
accused to explain what had actually happened and in the absence 
of any such explanation, it could be said that the accused committed 
the crime as alleged.
55.	 The law in the aforesaid regard is well-settled. Prosecution has to 
prove its case beyond reasonable doubt & that too on its own legs. 
The initial burden of proof is always on the prosecution. However, in 
cases where husband is alleged to have killed his wife in the night 
hours & that too within the residential house, then undoubtedly the 
husband has to offer some explanation as to what had actually 
happened and if he fails to offer any plausible explanation, this 
can go against him. However, Section 106 of the Evidence Act is 
subject to one well-settled principle of law. The prosecution has to 
first lay the foundational facts before it seeks to invoke Section 106 
of the Evidence Act. If the prosecution has not been able to lay the 
foundational facts for the purpose of invoking Section 106 of the 
Evidence Act, it cannot starightaway invoke the said Section and 
throw the entire burden on the accused to establish his innocence.
56.	 In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced that the High 
Court committed error in holding the appellant guilty of the offence 
of murder.
57.	 In the result, this appeal succeeds and is hereby allowed. 
58.	 The impugned Judgment and Order passed by the High Court is 
hereby set aside.
59.	 We are informed that the appellant has been enlarged on bail by 
this Court. His bail bonds stand discharged.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain