[2025] 5 S.C.R. 58 : 2025 INSC 466
Annaya Kocha Shetty (Dead) through LRs  
v. 
Laxmibai Narayan Satose since Deceased 
through LRs & Others
(Civil Appeal No. 84 of 2019)
08 April 2025
[Pankaj Mithal and S.V.N. Bhatti,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the correctness of the order passed by 
the High Court in revision application confirming the judgment 
of the appellate bench whereby decree of the trial court was 
reversed; and whether the ‘agreement of conducting’ between 
parties was in nature of licensor and licensee of the suit premises 
or merely for conducting the hotel business of the first defendant 
by the plaintiff.
Headnotes
Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 
1947 – ss.15A, 28 – Evidence Act, 1972 – ss.91, 92 – Plaintiff 
and the first defendant-owner of the property, entered into an 
agreement styled for conducting hotel business on the said 
property – Subsequently, first defendant served notice to the 
plaintiff to vacate and hand over the business – Plaintiff filed 
suit for declaration that plaintiff is the deemed tenant, and a 
restraint order against the defendants from interfering with or 
dispossessing the plaintiff from the plaint schedule which was 
allowed – Appellate court set aside the decree passed by the 
trial court, and the High Court upheld the same – Correctness: 
Held: Agreement is one for conducting the business of the first 
defendant – Oral evidence is excluded from consideration as 
none of the exceptions is attracted – Plaintiff adduced oral and 
documentary evidence either to dilute the obligation/standing of 
the plaintiff in the agreement, or to claim the status of a deemed 
tenants – On facts, the photocopy of the registration certificate 
would not change the status of the plaintiff from the conductor of 
the business to a sub-tenant and, by operation of law, a deemed 
* Author
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
59
Annaya Kocha Shetty (Dead) through LRs v.  
Laxmibai Narayan Satose since Deceased through LRs & Others
tenant – Receipts evidencing payment of royalty would militate 
against the status of deemed tenancy claimed by the plaintiff – 
Unless and until the case falls under one or the other exceptions 
enabling receipt of oral evidence on a written document, the court 
is precluded from entertaining oral evidence – Document or deed 
interpreted in a particular case is not relied upon, but the subject 
deed is construed on well-established principles – Law recognises 
both ownership and possession of an owner of a property – Lease 
recognises the outcome of a rightful separation of ownership and 
possession between lessor and lessee – Admittedly, defendant no. 1 
is in possession of the property from defendant no. 2 – Agreement 
of conducting business does not deal with the possession so 
enjoyed by defendant no. 1 in favour of the plaintiff – Absence of 
such a crucial clause in the agreement is a vital circumstance in 
construing the subject matter of the said agreement – Thus, what 
has been entrusted is to run the business in the plaint schedule but 
not occupying the plaint schedule under leave and licence – Terms 
of the agreement are clear that the entrustment to the plaintiff is 
the ownership of the hotel business of the first defendant and not 
the tenancy right of the first defendant in favour of the plaintiff – 
View taken by the first appellate court and the impugned order of 
the High Court, upheld. [Paras 18.1, 18.2, 22, 23, 24]
Deeds and documents – Rules of construction – Construction 
of the Contract:
Held: Contract is first constructed in its plain, ordinary and literal 
meaning, which is known as the literal rule of construction – If 
there is an absurdity created by literally reading the contract, a 
shift from literal rule may be allowed which is called the golden 
rule of construction – Contract may be purposively constructed 
in light of its object and context to determine the purpose of the 
contract – This approach must be used cautiously – Furthermore, 
the construction of a deed is generally speaking, a matter of law – 
However, when there is an ambiguity in the deed, determining its 
meaning is a mixed question of fact and law – This concept is 
encapsulated by ss.91 and 92 of the 1872 Act – Evidence Act, 
1872 – ss.91 and 92. [Paras 17.1-17.3, 18]
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – Ord.6 r.16 – Pleadings – Lengthy 
pleadings and judgments – AI/computer-generated statements – 
Meandering pleadings lead to discursive judgments – Need for 
brief and precise pleadings – Elucidated. [Para 3]
60
Supreme Court Reports
Case Law Cited
Shakuntala Shukla v. State of Uttar Pradesh [2021] 6 SCR 87 : 
(2021) 20 SCC 818; Provash Chandra Dalui and Another v. 
Biswanath Banerjee and Another [1989] 2 SCR 401 : (1989) Supp. 
1 SCC 487; Chandavarka Sita Ratna Rao v. Ashalata S. Guaram 
[1986] 3 SCR 866 : (1986) 4 SCC 447; Varisalli Mohd. Ilias v. 
Abdul Sattar Gulam Hussain (1991) Mah LJ 1523; Mangala Vaman 
Karandikar vs. Prakash Damodar Ranadeon [2021] 5 SCR 232 : 
(2021) 6 SCC 139; TN Electricity Board v. N. Raju Reddiar [1996] 
Supp. 1 SCR 739 : AIR (1996) SC 2025; Tyagaraja Mudaliyar and 
Another v. Vedathanni (1936) AIR PC 70 – referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
Scalia & B. Garner, Making Your Case: The Art of Persuading 
Judges, pp. 81 (2008) Ch-35; Halsbury, 4th Edn. Vol. 12,  
1461 – referred to.
List of Acts
Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947; 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; Evidence Act, 1872; Bombay Sales 
Tax Act, 1959; Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
List of Keywords
Agreement for conducting hotel business; Leave and license; 
Bar on adducing oral evidence; Registration certificate; Deemed 
tenancy; Royalty receipts; Rules of construction; Literal rule 
of construction; Golden rule of construction; Unnecessary and 
frivolous pleadings; Meandering pleadings; AI generated pleadings; 
Computer generated pleadings; Oral evidence; Registration 
certificate; Ownership and possession; Construction of the Contract; 
Literal rule of construction; Construction of a deed; Ambiguity in 
the deed; Lengthy pleadings and judgments; Need for brief and 
precise pleadings.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 84 of 2019
From the Judgment and Order dated 16.07.2018 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in CRA No. 247 of 2016
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
61
Annaya Kocha Shetty (Dead) through LRs v.  
Laxmibai Narayan Satose since Deceased through LRs & Others
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
B.H. Marlapalle, Sr. Adv., Kunal Cheema, Raghav Deshpande. 
Advs. for the Respondents:
Vinay Navare, Sr. Adv., Chinmoy Khaladkar, Abhinay, Ms. Parul 
Khurana, Rohan Batra, Rishabh Bhargava, Aman Vachher, 
Yadunath Chaudhary, Dhiraj, M/S. Vachher And Agrud, M/S. 
P.B.A. Legal.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
S.V.N. Bhatti, J.
1.	
The Civil Appeal arises from the Order dated 16.07.2018 in Civil 
Revision Application No. 247 of 2016 in the High Court of Judicature 
at Bombay (“Impugned Order”), confirming the Judgment dated 
17.08.2015 in appeal No. 547 of 2004 of the appellate bench . The 
Judgment dated 17.08.2015 reversed the judgment and decree 
dated 20/22.03.2004 in R.A.D. Suit No. 1860 of 1997 before the 
Small Causes Court at Mumbai. The LRs of the plaintiff are appellant 
nos. 1.1 to 1.4 in the Civil Appeal.
2.	
The plaintiff filed the suit for declaration that the plaintiff is the deemed 
tenant/protected licensee of the first defendant in terms of section 
15A of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control 
Act, 1947, as enforced from 01.02.1973 (“Bombay Rent Act”), for 
shop nos. 5 and 6, Shri Samarthashraya Vishranti Graha, Nanabhai 
Court, Dr. Babasahib Ambdedkar Marg, Hindmata Junction, Dadar, 
Bombay-400014 (for short, ‘the Plaint Schedule’). The plaintiff also 
prayed for a restraint order against the defendants from interfering 
with or dispossessing the plaintiff from the Plaint Schedule. The suit 
was filed against Laxmibai Narayan Satose/defendant no.1, and 
M.S. Nanabhoy/defendant no.2. The plaintiff pleads that the first 
defendant is the landlady, and through her, the plaintiff claims a right 
of declaration as noted above. Admittedly, the second defendant is 
the owner of the Plaint Schedule. The Plaint Schedule was under a 
lease with the husband of the first defendant, and after the original 
tenant’s demise, the first defendant continued as lessee of the Plaint 
62
Supreme Court Reports
Schedule. The first defendant was running a hotel under the name 
and style of “Shri Samarthashraya Vishranti Graha” (“the Hotel”). The 
first defendant, after the demise of her husband, ran the business 
for some time. But she was unable to run it successfully, so she 
allowed her brother ‘Namdev Morye’, to continue running the Hotel. 
The said arrangement did not prove to be advantageous to the first 
defendant. With this background, the plaintiff claims to have stepped 
in the Plaint Schedule and that, on 16.08.1967, an agreement styled 
for conducting hotel business was entered into between the plaintiff 
and the first defendant. The said arrangement was continued under 
subsequent agreements between the plaintiff and the first defendant. 
On 28.02.1997, the first defendant served notice to the plaintiff to 
vacate and hand over the business being run in the Plaint Schedule. 
With the above development, the plaintiff filed the suit for the reliefs 
noted above.
3.	
The averments in the plaint are elaborate; commensurate to the 
detailed plaint, the written statement is equally elaborate. To wit, 
the plaint runs into eight pages, and the written statement is sixteen 
pages long. The resultant consequence is that, in the trial, much 
oral evidence is brought on record, resulting in a lengthy judgment 
by the trial court. The judgment of the appellate bench is equally 
lengthy, even though the core issue for consideration could have 
been captured in a nutshell by the appellate bench. A judgment 
should be coherent, systematic, and logically organised. It should 
enable the reader to trace the facts to a logical conclusion on the 
basis of legal principles.1 Lately, this Court has been experiencing 
meandering pleadings irrespective of the nature of the dispute. We 
are reminded of Abraham Lincoln’s ode to a lawyer friend – “[h]e 
can compress the most words into the smallest ideas of any man I 
ever met.” Such lengthy pleadings would even upset Polonius from 
Shakespeare’s Hamlet. Every word that is not a help is a hindrance 
because it distracts. A reader who realizes that a brief is wordy will 
skim it; one who finds a brief terse and concise will read every word.2 
The parties to a suit ought not to compel the court to exercise its 
jurisdiction under Order 6 Rule 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 and strike out unnecessary or frivolous pleadings. The effort 
1	
Shakuntala Shukla v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2021) 20 SCC 818
2	
Scalia & B. Garner, Making Your Case: The Art of Persuading Judges, pp. 81 (2008) Ch-35.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
63
Annaya Kocha Shetty (Dead) through LRs v.  
Laxmibai Narayan Satose since Deceased through LRs & Others
of pleading and evidence should be to be concise to the cause and 
must not confuse the cause. The lengthy pleadings and avoidable 
evidence are well within the scrutiny of trial courts, and, at the right 
stage, must be regulated within four corners of the law. Such an 
approach by trial courts would like a stitch in time, save nine. Long 
and drawn-out pleadings will run the risk of having a cascading effect 
on the appellate and revisional courts. Meandering pleadings will land 
up with laden weight in SLPs, making the narrative difficult. The time 
has come for courts to invoke the jurisdiction under Order 6 Rule 
16 and make litigation workable. Courts are also confronted with 
AI-generated or computer-generated statements. While technology 
is useful in enhancing efficiency and efficacy, the placid pleadings 
will disorient the cause in a case. It is time that the approach to 
pleadings is re-invented and re-introduced to be brief and precise. 
Having remarked on the need for brevity, we have a task on hand 
to deliver a brief judgment.
4.	
The solace to this Court in deciding the Civil Appeal is that all the 
learned Counsel appearing for the parties have presented the core 
of controversy alone for adjudication in the Civil Appeal. The prelude 
to the plaintiff’s narrative is needed in as much as meandering 
pleadings lead to discursive judgments. 
5.	
The plaintiff was in the business of conducting hotels in Mumbai. On 
mutually agreed terms and conditions, the first defendant granted a 
leave and license of the suit premises to augment her income. In 
unequivocal terms, the plaint refers to the prohibition of law prevailing 
then, and that the deed was devised to circumvent such prohibition. 
Therefore, it is alleged that the agreement dated 16.08.1967 is 
captioned as an ‘agreement of conducting’, and the parties are referred 
to as owner and conductor. The agreement dated 16.08.1967 is one 
in the nature of the licensor and licensee of the premises of the Plaint 
Schedule, but not a mere agreement for conducting the hotel business 
of the first defendant by the plaintiff. The arrangement initially lasted 
for eleven months and has been extended from time to time. The 
Plaint Schedule falls within section 28 of the Bombay Rent Act. Section 
15A has been inserted into the Bombay Rent Act vide amendment of 
1963, which was later enforced from 01.02.1973, whereunder deemed 
tenancy and consequent protection to the tenant has been granted by 
the legislature. The plaintiff, by the existing arrangement of leave and 
license with the first defendant, is a deemed tenant and hence prayed 
for the reliefs referred to above. The first defendant contested the suit 
64
Supreme Court Reports
and denied the existence of a landlord-tenant relationship between 
the plaintiff and the defendant. The agreement dated 16.08.1967, in 
letter and spirit, was entered into between the first defendant and the 
plaintiff for the conduct of hotel business being carried on by the first 
defendant. The agreement dated 16.08.1967 is a contemporaneous 
document evidencing the agreement between the parties, and the 
clauses have been appropriately incorporated and adhered to by the 
parties till the present suit was filed. By serving the notice to hand 
over the business, the first defendant terminated the arrangement. 
Section 15A of the Bombay Rent Act is not attracted to the subject 
arrangement, and the plaintiff cannot claim the status of a deemed 
tenant of the Plaint Schedule.
6.	
The trial court answered the substantial issues in favour of the 
plaintiff and against the first defendant. The gist of the reasoning and 
findings is that the plaintiff is a licensee and not a mere conductor 
of the business of the first defendant. The trial court held that it 
depends on the nature and quality of the plaintiff’s occupation of the 
suit premises and not on the mere nomenclature of the agreement 
dated 16.08.1967. The trial court, while referring to various clauses 
of the agreement dated 16.08.1967, held that:
6.1	 Clause I of this agreement denotes that the owner has granted 
the plaintiff leave and licence to use and occupy the hotel 
premises.
6.2	 Clause III of the agreement indicates that in consideration of 
the leave and licence, the conductor shall pay the owner for 
the first 5 periods each of 11 months royalty at the rate of Rs. 
1000/- per month before the 5th of subsequent months. 
6.3	 Clauses I and III of the agreement clearly show that in 
consideration of Rs. 1000/- per month, defendant no. 1 granted 
leave and licence in favour of the plaintiff to use and occupy 
the hotel premises.
6.4	 Clause IV of the said agreement fastens liability upon the plaintiff 
to bear and pay regularly all the electric bills, water charges, 
workman wage, license fee, etc. The trial court held that if it 
were defendant no. 1, who was running the business, she would 
have been expected to bear all these charges.
6.5	 Clause VI of the agreement shifts the risk to bear all the costs 
regarding the business on the plaintiff.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
65
Annaya Kocha Shetty (Dead) through LRs v.  
Laxmibai Narayan Satose since Deceased through LRs & Others
6.6	 Clause VII imposes restrictions on the plaintiff to use the suit 
premises for carrying on hotel business only and not to change 
the nature of the business. Hence, no running business was 
given to him.
6.7	 Clause XIV of this agreement makes the plaintiff fully responsible 
for paying the workers their wages and exempts defendant no. 
1 regarding the same. None of the servants initially employed 
by the deceased defendant no. 1 were there after the execution 
of the said agreement.
6.8	 The trial court was of the view that all the various clauses of the 
agreement indicate that the deceased defendant no. 1 did not 
retain any dominant control in the hotel business being run by 
the plaintiff in the suit premises. Hence, if the plaintiff carried on 
the business, defendant no. 1 ought not to have discontinued 
paying sales tax. Merely mentioning the word “royalty” in receipts 
is not sufficient to conclude that there was an agreement of 
conducting the Hotel between the parties. Considering the 
nature of exclusive use, occupation, and possession of the 
plaintiff with respect to the suit premises from 1967 to date, 
the nomenclature of the agreement has no wider significance 
in determining the relationship.
6.9	 Relying on oral evidence, the trial court notes that the law in 
force at the time did not allow for a tenant-landlord arrangement 
in the factual matrix at hand. Consequently, the agreement dated 
16.08.1967 was styled as an agreement of conducting, but the 
contents pointed towards an agreement of leave and license. 
This is also buttressed, the trial court held, by the fact that the 
plaintiff was paying rent of Rs. 1000/- per month. The trial court 
held that the evidence of the witnesses deserves to be relied 
upon, especially because during cross-examination, the said 
oral and documentary evidence was not seriously challenged. 
Thus, it was held that the plaintiff is a deemed tenant under 
section 15A of the Act.
7.	
The appellate bench examined and interpreted the agreement dated 
16.08.1967 in its entirety and reversed the judgement and decree 
of the trial court. The appellate bench examined the scope and 
object of sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence Act, 1872 and the bar 
on parties to an agreement to adduce oral evidence contrary to the 
66
Supreme Court Reports
clauses in a written agreement. The appellate bench held that the 
contemporaneous agreement through which the plaintiff secured 
permission to enter into the Plaint Schedule is a plain agreement 
to conduct the business of the first defendant and not a leave and 
license of premises in favour of the plaintiff. The appellate bench 
found that the trial court failed to interpret relevant clauses in the 
agreement that pointed to the arrangement as one of leave and 
license. The appellate bench appreciated the consideration received 
by the first defendant between March 1967 and September 1973, 
i.e., 99 receipts evidencing receipt and payment of royalty for 
conducting the business. The appellate bench heavily relied on these 
royalty receipts as evidence supporting the existence of conducting 
agreements for running the hotel business rather than a simple 
leave and license arrangement. Further, it pointed out that the trial 
court should have carefully considered the tenor of these receipts. 
The consistent payment of royalties every month indicated that the 
arrangement was merely to conduct a business and not to be a 
licensee of the Plaint Schedule. Electricity bills, sales tax registration, 
BMC permission, etc., were part of the evidence considered by the 
appellate bench in assessing the nature of the plaintiff’s occupation 
and business operations. By relying on the applicable clauses in the 
agreement dated 16.08.1967 and the contemporaneous situation, 
the agreement was styled as an agreement for conducting business. 
The appeal of defendant no.1 was hence allowed.
8.	
Aggrieved by the reversal of the trial court order by the appellate 
bench, the plaintiff filed Civil Revision Application No. 247 of 2016. 
The High Court, through the Impugned Order, confirmed the view 
of the appellate bench. It was held by the High Court that sections 
91 and 115 of the Evidence Act, 1872 point to the finding that the 
Plaint Schedule was given for running the Hotel on a conducting 
basis and not on a leave and license basis.
9.	
The High Court held that the intention of defendant no. 1 and her 
LRs was to give the hotel business on a conducting basis to the 
plaintiff and that there was no intention to execute a leave and license 
agreement regarding the said premises. The Impugned Order looked 
into the agreement dated 16.08.1967 in detail and stated that –
	•
The “recital” notes the conducting basis nature of the agreement.
	•
Clause III refers to the payment of royalty at Rs. 1000 pm.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
67
Annaya Kocha Shetty (Dead) through LRs v.  
Laxmibai Narayan Satose since Deceased through LRs & Others
	•
Clause IV requires the plaintiff to incur and pay electricity charges.
	•
Clause V requires the rent of the premises to be borne by 
defendant no. 1 to the landlord defendant no. 2.
	•
Clause VII and X point towards conducting of the hotel business.
	•
Utensils and furniture were annexed.
10.	 The High Court held that all the subsequent agreements formed a 
part of the conducting agreements. Moreover, the plaintiff cannot 
deny the execution of the conducting agreement on the premise 
that he was not well-conversant with the English language. Thus, 
the High Court held that the appellate bench was correct in noting 
that the agreement was for the conduct of business.
11.	 Shri B.H. Marlapalle, learned Senior Counsel, placed reliance on the 
reasoning adopted by the trial court and contrasted the interpretation 
adopted by the appellate bench and High Court, on a plain reading 
of agreement dated 16.08.1967, as erroneous. It is argued that the 
nomenclature of a deed is not the determinative circumstance of the 
status, rights, duties, or obligations undertaken by the parties to a 
deed. From the evidence on record, with considerable force, it is 
argued that the entrustment of the Plaint Schedule to the plaintiff is 
not that of an ongoing business, but that of a lessee-licensee. The 
agreement must be understood in its letter and spirit, as well as the 
right with which the plaintiff is enjoying the Plaint Schedule. The 
learned Senior Counsel places reliance on Provash Chandra Dalui 
and another v. Biswanath Banerjee and another3 for the proposition 
that the best interpretation of the contract is to be made from the 
context, and it is to be construed with reference to its object and the 
whole of its terms. Further, he relies on Chandavarka Sita Ratna Rao 
v. Ashalata S. Guaram4 to interpret Section 15A of the Bombay Rent 
Act to contend that a valid pre-1973 license converts the plaintiff into 
a tenant entitled for protection under the Bombay Rent Act. 
12.	 The learned Senior Counsel fairly argues that the standing of the 
plaintiff is dependent on the interpretation of the agreement dated 
16.08.1967 and also the subsequent documents evidencing the 
3	
(1989) Supp. 1 SCC 487
4	
(1986) 4 SCC 447
68
Supreme Court Reports
nature of enjoyment of the plaintiff. He relies on the test in Varisalli 
Mohd. Ilias v. Abdul Sattar Gulam Hussain5 for determining whether 
under an agreement, leave and license are created or authorised to 
conduct business to interpret the subject agreement, and the decision 
in all fours is applicable to the facts of the case.
13.	 Mr. Chinmoy Khaladkar, learned Counsel appearing for defendant 
no. 1, argues that the plaintiff, both in law and fact, is estopped from 
resiling from the clauses under the agreement dated 16.08.1967. It 
is axiomatic and not disputed by defendant no. 1 that a deed is not 
constructed by the nomenclature of the document but by the text and 
the tenor of all the clauses governing the relationship between the 
parties. By relying on Provash Chandra Dalui (supra), he commends 
this Court to interpret the suit agreement. Sections 91 and 92 of the 
Evidence Act, 1872 are attracted to the case on hand and do not 
fall within any of the exceptions for adducing oral evidence, either 
contrary to the agreed clauses or to explain the clauses agreed to 
between the parties. He has invited our attention to the agreement 
in its entirety, particularly the preface determining the standing of 
the plaintiff as conductor and the first defendant as owner of the 
business. The agreement deals with conveying authority to the 
plaintiff. Defendant no. 1, under the agreement, declares to have 
been carrying on the business of hotel and tea catering and desired 
to give the right to conduct the business in favour of the plaintiff. 
Clause 1 further reinforces the relationship. Clauses 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 
15, and 16 abundantly make it plain and clear that considering the 
contemporaneous circumstances in 1967, the plaintiff could deal with 
the business being run by the first defendant, and not the occupancy 
right of the Plaint Schedule. The certificate of registration under the 
Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, is rightly excluded by the appellate and 
revisional courts. Further, the photocopy of the certificate cannot be 
relied upon in evidence for any purpose. To appreciate the crux of 
the agreement dated 16.08.1967, the schedule of items entrusted 
to the plaintiff for running the business would be important. 
13.1	Mr. Chinmoy Khaladkar also relies on Mangala Vaman Karandikar 
vs. Prakash Damodar Ranadeon6 to delineate the scope and ambit 
5	
(1991) Mah LJ 1523
6	
(2021) 6 SCC 139
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
69
Annaya Kocha Shetty (Dead) through LRs v.  
Laxmibai Narayan Satose since Deceased through LRs & Others
of sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence Act, 1872. According to him, 
the Three-Judge Bench judgement in Mangala Vaman Karandikar 
(supra) squarely governs the situation, and oral evidence ought 
not to be examined to interpret the agreement dated 16.08.1967 
and the subsequent agreements. 
14.	 Shri Vinay Navare, learned Senior Counsel, appears for respondent 
no. 3, a subsequent purchaser from defendant no. 2, and supports 
the plaintiff. The arguments of Shri Vinay Navare are not adverted to 
as the second defendant did not participate before the trial court or 
the appellate bench. In the subject Civil Appeal, we are not enquiring 
into or adverting to the stance of respondent no. 3 vis-à-vis the other 
parties to the litigation. The available contentions of respondent no. 
3 are left open for consideration in an appropriate proceeding. 
15.	 We have taken note of the arguments addressed by the learned 
Counsel appearing for the parties.
16.	 The circumstances dealing with the dispute between the parties are 
stated in required detail in the preceding paragraphs. At the outset, 
let us refer to the ratio of this Court in Provash Chandra Dalui (supra) 
on the construction of the basic agreement between the plaintiff and 
the defendant. This Court held that the court must look at the words 
used in the contract unless they are such that one may suspect that 
they do not covey the intention correctly. If the words are clear, there 
is very little the court can do about it. In constructing a deed, looking 
at the surrounding circumstances and subject matter is legitimate 
only if the words used are doubtful. 
17.	 The guide to the construction of deeds and tools adopted can broadly 
be summarised as follows:
17.1	The contract is first constructed in its plain, ordinary and literal 
meaning. This is also known as the literal rule of construction.
17.2	If there is an absurdity created by literally reading the contract, 
a shift from literal rule may be allowed. This construction is 
generally called the golden rule of construction.
17.3	Lastly, the contract may be purposively constructed in light of 
its object and context to determine the purpose of the contract. 
This approach must be used cautiously. 
18.	 The construction of a deed is “generally speaking, a matter of law.” 
70
Supreme Court Reports
However, when there is an ambiguity in the deed, determining 
its meaning is a mixed question of fact and law.7 This concept is 
encapsulated by sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence Act, 1872.
18.1	Section 91 of the Evidence Act, 1872 denotes that a deed 
constitutes the primary evidence of the terms to which the 
parties are to adhere. Whereas section 92 of the Evidence 
Act, 1872 forbids any contradictions or variations in a written 
document by extrinsic evidence.8 However, there are exceptions 
outlined in the proviso to section 92, that allow variations from 
this general rule:
“92. Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement. – 
“When the terms of any such contract, grant or other 
disposition of property, or any matter required by law 
to be reduced to the form of a document have been 
proved according to the last section, no evidence of 
any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted, 
as between the parties to any such instrument or 
their representatives in interest, for the purpose of 
contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from, 
its terms; 
Proviso (1): Any fact may be proved which would 
invalidate any document, or which would entitle 
any person to any decree or order relating thereto; 
such as fraud, intimidation, illegality, want of due 
execution, want of capacity in any contracting party 
want or failure of consideration, or mistake in fact 
or law:
Proviso (2): The existence of any separate oral 
agreement as to any matter on which a document 
is silent, and which is not inconsistent with its terms, 
may be proved. In considering whether or not this 
proviso applies, the Court shall have regard to the 
degree of formality of the document: 
7	
Halsbury, 4th Edn. Vol. 12 ¶1461.
8	
TN Electricity Board v. N. Raju Reddiar, AIR (1996) SC 2025 at 2027. 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
71
Annaya Kocha Shetty (Dead) through LRs v.  
Laxmibai Narayan Satose since Deceased through LRs & Others
Proviso (3): The existence of any separate oral 
agreement, constituting a condition precedent to 
the attaching of any obligation under any such  
contract, grant or disposition of property, may be 
proved.
Proviso (4): The existence of any distinct subsequent 
oral agreement to rescind or modify any such 
contract, grant or disposition of property, may be 
proved, except in cases in which such contract, grant 
or disposition of property is by law required to be 
in writing, or has been registered according to the 
law in force for the time being as to the registration 
of documents.
Proviso (5): Any usage or custom by which incidents 
not expressly mentioned in any contract are usually 
annexed to contracts of that description, may be 
proved; Provided that the annexing of such incident 
would not be repugnant to, or inconsistent with the 
express terms of the contract:
Proviso (6): Any fact may be proved which shows in 
what manner the language of a document is related 
to existing facts.”
(Emphasis supplied)
18.2	The subtle distinction in the point of law, as carved out by the 
provisos, is that the evidence to vary the terms of an agreement 
in writing is not admissible, but evidence to show that there is 
no agreement in the first place is admissible.9 Thus, unless the 
grounds fall within the provisos read with the illustrations to 
section 92, there is a bar on adducing oral evidence.
19.	 Now, we excerpt and construe the relevant clauses of the agreement 
dated 16.08.1967:
9	
Tyagaraja Mudaliyar and another v. Vedathanni (1936) AIR PC 70.
72
Supreme Court Reports
“THIS AGREEMENT made at Bombay this 16th day of 
August 1967 BETWEEN SMT. LAXMIBAI NARAYAN 
SATOSE, a Hindu adult inhabitant of Bombay, hereinafter 
referred to as the “Owner” of the One Part (which expression 
shall mean and include her heirs, administrators, legal 
representatives and assigns unless repugnant to the context 
herein contained) AMD SHRI ANNAYA SHETTY, also a 
Hindu inhabitant of Bombay hereinafter referred to as the 
“Conductor” of the Other Part (which expression shall mean 
and include his heir, administrators and legal representatives 
unless repugnant to the context herein contained.
WHEREAS THE Owner above named is the Owner 
and sole proprietor of a Hotel Business known as “Shri 
Samarthashraya Vishranti Graya” at 225, Nanabhai Court, 
Dr. Ambedkar Road, at Shop Nos. 5 and 6 on the ground 
floor bearing C.S. No. 11/26 Dadar, Naigaum.
AND WHEREAS the said Owner has been carrying on the 
business of Hotel and tea catering in the said premises.
AND WHEREAS the Owner is desirous of giving the said 
business on conducting basis and the Conductor has 
agreed to take upon certain terms and conditions.
AND WHEREAS it is considered desirable to reduce the 
terms and conditions into writing.
NOW THIS AGREEMENT WITNESSETH AS UNDER:
1.	
That the Owner does hereby give to the Conductor 
and the Conductor doth hereby take accordingly for 
conducting the said business concerned viz. the said 
Hotel business of the Owner carried on under the name 
and style of “Shri Samarthashraya Vishranti Graha” 
at the above said premises and for the purpose of 
carrying on the said business, the said Hotel premises 
and to use fittings and fixtures and furniture and 
other accessories (more particularly described in the 
Schedule annexed herto under) for the period and 
upon the terms and conditions herein after contained.
2.
xxx	 xxx	 xxx
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
73
Annaya Kocha Shetty (Dead) through LRs v.  
Laxmibai Narayan Satose since Deceased through LRs & Others
3.	
In consideration of the leave and license the 
Conductor shall pay to the owner for the first five 
periods each of eleven months Royalty at the rate 
of Rs. 1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) every 
month on or before the 5th of the subsequent month. 
The Conductor agrees that for the sixth, seventh and 
eighth period of eleven months each, the Conductor 
agrees that for the sixth, seventh and eighth period of 
eleven months each, the Conductor shall pay to ‘the 
Owner a higher amount of Royalty per month (i.e. 
Rs. 1100/- per month) (Rupees One Thousand One 
Hundred per month) at the time of the renewal of this. 
4.
xxx	 xxx	 xxx
5.
xxx	 xxx	 xxx
6.
xxx	 xxx	 xxx
7.	
That the Conductor shall use the said premises for 
carrying on Hotel business only of the Owner as 
aforesaid and he shall not change the name and the 
nature of the business. 
8.	
That the Conductor shall carry on and conduct the said 
business entrusted to him, himself and he shall not give 
the same to anybody else for conducting or otherwise. 
9.	
That the Conductor shall observe and perform all 
the rules and regulations and bye laws imposed by 
the local and Government authorities for doing the 
business of the like nature and he shall keep the 
owner indemnified against any action or penalties 
that might be imposed for breach thereof. 
10.	 It is further agreed by the Conductor that he shall use 
the furniture fixtures and the business accessories as 
set out in the Schedule herein under annexed with true 
and proper are and caution and on the termination 
of this agreement he shall hand over the possession 
of the along with the premises to the owner in the 
same condition.
11.
xxx	 xxx	 xxx
74
Supreme Court Reports
12.	 That on termination of this agreement by efflux of time 
or on earlier determination thereof, the Conductor 
shall quit and cease to use and occupy said premises 
and/or carry on and conduct the said business of the 
Owner and the Conductor shall hand over complete 
charge of the business to the owner peacefully and 
without delay and demur.
13.
xxx	 xxx	 xxx
14.	 It is further agreed by the Conductor that he shall be 
fully responsible to the workers employed by him for 
paying their wages and the Owner is not responsible 
for the same AND on the date of the commencement 
of this agreement there was no worker in the said 
concern employed by the owner.
15.	 It is further agreed that if the Conductor does not 
desire to run and conduct the said hotel business, 
the Conductor shall serve on the owner a notice to 
that effect of one month and on the expiration of 
the said notice period of one month the Owner shall 
assume the charge and take possession of the said 
hotel immediately.
16.	 The Conductor hereby agrees to allow the owner to 
visit or inspect the Hotel premises at all reasonable 
times without any obstruction.”
(Emphasis supplied) 
20.	 The plaintiff, contrary to the clauses under which the plaintiff has taken 
over the Hotel run in the Plaint Schedule, pleads the relationship 
of tenant/subtenant as having been given under leave and license.
21.	 The construction of the excerpted clauses can be summed up thus:
a.	
The nomenclature is an agreement of conducting.
b.	
The parties to the agreement are referred to as owner and 
conductor.
c.	
The parties agree on the ownership of the hotel business known 
as ‘Shri Samarthashraya Vishranti Graha.’
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
75
Annaya Kocha Shetty (Dead) through LRs v.  
Laxmibai Narayan Satose since Deceased through LRs & Others
d.	
The owner has been carrying on the hotel business in the 
Plaint Schedule.
e.	
The owner desires to give the business on a conducting basis, 
and the conductor has agreed to take the business upon the 
terms and conditions set out therein. Clause 1 specifically refers 
to the owner giving to the conductor, and the conductor agreeing 
to take for conducting the business. That is, the said hotel 
business of the owner carried on under the name and style of 
Shri Samarthashraya Vishranti Graha at the aforesaid premises. 
The owner thus granted to the conductor to use and occupy the 
said hotel premises – including fittings, fixtures, furniture, etc. 
f.	
The consideration is stated as royalty for conducting the 
business. 
g.	
The conductor is obligated to carry on the Hotel business only 
of the owner.
h.	
The conductor carries on and conducts the business entrusted 
to him and is barred from entrusting it to a third person for 
conducting the business otherwise.
i.	
The conductor is allowed to use the utensils and fixtures, and is 
obligated to return them upon the termination of the agreement. 
j.	
The conductor is obligated to hand over the complete charge 
of the business to the owner if the relationship is terminated 
either by termination or efflux of time.
k.	
The conductor obligates himself to be fully responsible to the 
workers and the salaries payable to them.
l.	
The conductor severs the relationship of running the business 
by serving a month’s notice to the owner. 
m.	
The owner is allowed to visit or inspect the Hotel at all times 
without obstruction. 
22.	 The plaintiff and the first defendant entered into the agreement dated 
16.08.1967, and the contemporaneous document reproduces or 
reflects the subject matter of the agreement, terms and conditions 
agreed between the parties, rights, and limitations on the owner 
and the conductor. The plaintiff has taken over the business under 
the agreement dated 16.08.1967. With a few minor variations, the 
76
Supreme Court Reports
agreements referred to above have been entered into, and the plaintiff 
asserts a change of status only when a notice is served to hand 
over the business by the first defendant. The plain interpretation of 
the agreement dated 16.08.1967 discloses that the parties to the 
agreement, briefly stated, were contemplating dealing with a business 
and have entered into an agreement for conducting the business. 
The argument of the plaintiff, by looking at the nomenclature, is that 
the standing of the plaintiff as interpreted by the appellate bench 
and the High Court is erroneous. By looking at the deed, we have 
no hesitation in holding that the agreement is one for conducting 
the business of the first defendant. We are excluding oral evidence 
from consideration as none of the exceptions is attracted. 
23.	 The plaintiff adduced oral and documentary evidence either to 
dilute the obligation/standing of the plaintiff in the agreement dated 
16.08.1967, or to claim the status of a deemed tenant. The first 
and foremost document relied on is the registration certificate under 
the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959. The plaintiff, as conductor of the 
business, has assumed the responsibility for the incidences of running 
the business. This includes payment of sales tax as well. Including 
the subject business in the dealership of the plaintiff would not 
materially alter the position under the agreement dated 16.08.1967. 
Further, a photocopy of the registration certificate is exhibited before 
this Court. We are convinced that, in the facts and circumstances 
of the case, the said photocopy of the registration certificate will not 
change the status of the plaintiff from the conductor of the business 
to a sub-tenant and, by operation of law, a deemed tenant. Similarly, 
the receipts evidencing payment of royalty would militate against the 
status of deemed tenancy claimed by the plaintiff. As noted earlier, 
sections 91 and 92 are substantive provisions under the Evidence 
Act, 1872. Unless and until the case falls under one or the other 
exceptions enabling receipt of oral evidence on a written document, 
the court is precluded from entertaining oral evidence. The document 
or deed interpreted in a particular case is not relied upon, but the 
subject deed is construed on well-established principles. The law 
recognises both ownership and possession of an owner of a property. 
A lease recognises the outcome of a rightful separation of ownership 
and possession between lessor and lessee. Section 108 of The 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 deals with the rights of the lessor 
and lessee. Under the said section, one of the conditions is that 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
77
Annaya Kocha Shetty (Dead) through LRs v.  
Laxmibai Narayan Satose since Deceased through LRs & Others
the lessor is bound by lessee’s request to put lessee in possession 
of the property. In the case on hand, admittedly, defendant no. 1 is 
in possession of the property from defendant no. 2. Whereas the 
Agreement of Conducting business does not deal with the possession 
so enjoyed by defendant no. 1 in favour of the plaintiff. The absence 
of such a crucial clause in the agreement dated 16.08.1967 is a vital 
circumstance in construing the subject matter of the said agreement. 
This is an added circumstance to hold that what has been entrusted 
is to run the business in the plaint schedule but not occupying 
the plaint schedule under leave and licence. In the case on hand, 
the terms of the agreement dated 16.08.1967 are clear that the 
entrustment to the plaintiff is the ownership of the hotel business of 
the first defendant and not the tenancy right of the first defendant 
in favour of the plaintiff. 
24.	 From the above perspective and for the reasons stated supra, we 
are in agreement with the view taken by the first appellate court 
and the Impugned Order of the High Court. The Civil Appeal fails 
and is accordingly dismissed with costs quantified at Rs. 1,00,000/- 
payable to defendant no. 1. Pending applications, if any, shall stand 
disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain