[2025] 2 S.C.R. 313 : 2025 INSC 142
Gulshan Kumar 
v. 
Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
(Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1018 of 2022 ) 
03 February 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to extending the benefits for Persons with Benchmark 
Disabilities-PwBD candidates to all persons with disabilities-PwD 
candidates in writing their examinations.
Headnotes†
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 – Rights of 
persons with disabilities – Persons with disabilities-PwD and 
Persons with Benchmark Disabilities-PwBD – Discrimination – 
Petitioner, diagnosed with Focal Hand Dystonia, type of 
Writer’s Cramp, classified as chronic neurological condition, 
and assessed with 25% permanent disability – He applied 
for various examinations conducted by different recruitment 
bodies, however, not provided with any facilities available to 
PwD, such facilities restricted only to the PwBD – Writ petition 
by the petitioner seeking directions to respondents to provide 
the petitioner with the facility of a scribe, compensatory time 
and all other facilities, considering his disability status for 
examinations – Clarification by the court that respondent 
No.2-State Bank of India not to insist on the requirement of 
a benchmark disability for the facility of a scribe – Pursuant 
thereto, the petitioner provided with a scribe and compensatory 
time during the examinations – Case of the petitioner that 
though the Office Memorandum dt 10.08.2022 came to be 
issued by Union of India in accordance with the directions of 
this Court in Vikas Kumar’s case, it failed to incorporate the 
essence of reasonable accommodation, the true meaning and 
purpose of the Act, all benefits relating to PwBD candidates, 
not extended to PwD candidates, only selective facilities were 
extended, as such contains defects:
Held: Principle of reasonable accommodation is central to ensure 
equality for all the persons with disabilities; and denying the 
* Author
314
facility of scribe or compensatory time, constitutes discrimination 
under the Act – Artificial distinction and bifurcation drawn between 
PwD and PwBD disabilities (40% disabled or more) is sought 
to be diminished by extending various rights to candidates with 
disabilities that were earlier limited only to those with benchmark 
disabilities – Examination bodies are stressed upon to implement 
accessibility measures, to prevent discrimination and provide 
equal opportunities for the persons with disabilities – Rights of 
disabled persons are less instructive and more general and that, 
right to education, right to equality, and right against discrimination 
accorded to them will only be truly realized, when State structures 
form policies, laws, and rules to provide equal access and 
reasonable accommodation to such persons – All the benefits given 
to PwBD candidates must also be extended to PwD candidates, 
and there can be no discrimination between the candidates in 
granting facilities such as scribes, compensatory time except for 
reservation, in writing the examinations – Certain defects and 
lacunas in the guidelines issued by respondent No. 5, as well as in 
the implementation of this Court’s directions, resulting in different 
authorities following disparate procedures – Thus, urgent need 
for uniform memorandum for examinations applicable to all PwD 
candidates, and responsibility of respondent no. 5 to ensure its 
proper and just compliance – Guidelines issued by respondent 
no.5 pursuant to the directions of this Court, to be enforced, by 
extending the benefits for PwBD candidates to all PwD candidates 
in writing their examinations – Direction to respondent no.5 to 
revisit the guidelines, remove the restrictions and grant relaxations 
in a reasonable manner and re-notify the same – Constitution of 
India – Art.32. [Paras 10, 12, 13, 15, 17, 19]
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 – Persons with 
disabilities – Guidelines by the nodal agency-Government 
of India pursuant to the directions of this Court in Vikas 
Kumar’s case – Enforcement – Benefits extended for PwBD 
candidates to be extended to all PwD candidates in writing 
their examinations – Directions to Government of India to 
revisit the Office Memorandum dated 10.08.2022, remove the 
restrictions, grant relaxations in a reasonable manner and 
re-notify the same:
Held: Directions to all authorities to uniformly follow guidelines 
issued and ensure strict adherence – Periodic sensitization drive to 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
315
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
be carried out at educational institutions – Setting-up of grievance 
redressal portal – Re-notification of the existing guidelines – 
Extension of validity of scribe certificate – Setting up of incentive 
programs for scribes – Allowing candidates time prior to examination 
to familiarise with the scribe – Offer choice of examination modes 
to PwD candidates – Penal action against authorities on failing to 
follow the guidelines – Sensitisation of the authorities, to address 
the reasonable accommodation needs of PwDs – Ensure strict 
compliance with the Vikash Kumar’s case and Avni Prakash’s case 
as well as the provisions of the RPwD Act, 2016, with a special 
focus on ‘reasonable accommodation’. [Para 19]
Case Law Cited
Vikas Kumar v. Union Public Service Commission and Others 
[2021] 12 SCR 311 : (2021) 5 SCC 370 – relied on. 
Avni Prakash v. National Testing Agency (NTA) & Others [2021] 11 
SCR 891 : (2021) SCC Online SC 1112; Arnab Roy v. Consortium 
of National Law Universities and Another [2023] 14 SCR 464 : 
(2024) 5 SCC 793; Kaushal Kishor v. State of Uttar Pradesh and 
Others, Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 113 of 2016 : [2023] 8 SCR 
581 – referred to. 
Moore v. British Columbia (Education) [2012] 3 SCR; Mental 
Disability Advocacy Center (MDAC) v. Bulgaria, Complaint No. 
41/2007 dated 03.06.2008; International Association Autism 
Europe v. France, Complaint No. 13/2002; G.L. v. ITALY, 
Application No. 59751/15 dated 10.12.2020; T.H. v. Bulgaria, 
Application no. 46519/20 dated 11.07.2023; XXXX v. HR Rail 
SA Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber) dated 10.02.2022 in 
Case C‐485/20 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016. 
List of Keywords
Persons with Benchmark Disabilities-PwBD candidates; Persons 
with disabilities-PwD candidates; Rights of persons with 
disabilities; Focal Hand Dystonia, type of Writer’s Cramp; Chronic 
neurological condition; 25% permanent disability; Facility of scribe; 
316
Compensatory time; Disability status for examinations; Benchmark 
disability; Office Memorandum dated 10.08.2022 issued by Union 
of India; Reasonable accommodation; Conditions/benefits relating 
to PwBD candidates, not extended to PwD candidates; Principle of 
reasonable accommodation; Periodic sensitization drive; Grievance 
redressal portal for persons with disabilities; Re-notification of 
existing guidelines; Extension of validity of scribe certificate; Setting 
up of incentive programs for scribes; Compliance with Vikash 
Kumar’s case and Avni Prakash’s case; Right to education; Right 
to equality; Right against discrimination; Choice of examination 
modes. 
Case Arising From
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Civil) No. 
1018 of 2022
(Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
Appearances for Parties
Rushabh Vidyarthi, Prannv Dhawan, Ms. Meenakshi Pahuja, 
Vikas Jain, Aviral Saxena, Ms. Shrawani, Hardik Jayal, Advs. for 
the Petitioner.
Vaibhav Dang, Amrendra Kumar Mehta, Sanjay Kapur, Shreekant 
Neelappa Terdal, Sharath Nambiar, Vatsal Joshi, Akshit Pradhan, 
Rajan Kumar Chourasia, Gaurang Bhushan, Arun K. Sinha, Rakesh 
Singh, Advs. for the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
R. Mahadevan, J.
1.	
This writ petition has been filed as a Public Interest Litigation invoking 
jurisdiction under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, seeking a 
writ of mandamus directing the Respondent Nos.1 to 4 to provide the 
petitioner with the facility of a scribe, compensatory time and all other 
facilities, to which he may be entitled, under the law, considering his 
disability status for the upcoming examinations, the details of which 
are tabulated below:
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
317
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
Examinations
Conducting Bodies
Date(s)
Common Recruitment 
Process of Recruitment 
of Probationary officers/ 
Management trainees
First Respondent
26/11/2022 or 
any other date
State Bank of India 
(Junior Associate & 
Sales)
Second Respondent 12/11/2022 or 
any other date
State Bank of India 
Probationary officer (PO)
Second Respondent 17/12/2022 to 
20/12/2022 or 
any other date
Staff Selection 
Commission’s Combined 
Graduate Level (CGL)
Third Respondent
1/12/2022 to 
13/12/2022 or 
any other date
Bihar Staff Selection 
Commission’s Combined 
Graduate Level
Fourth Respondent
26/11/2022 or 
any other date
The petitioner has also sought a direction to the Respondent No.5 
to initiate suitable action against the examining bodies that have 
failed to adhere to the guidelines issued by the Respondent No.5 / 
Government of India, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) 
vide Office Memorandum in F.No.29-6/2019-DD-III dated 10.08.2022.
2.	
Vide order dated 15.12.2022,1 this court clarified that the Respondent 
No.2 shall not insist on the requirement of a benchmark disability 
within the meaning of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 
20162 for the facility of a scribe, having due regard to the judgment 
1	
“1. Mr. Sanjay Kapur, counsel appearing on behalf of the State Bank of India (the second respondent) 
states that a communication has been addressed by the second respondent to the petitioner requiring 
the petitioner to produce necessary documents so as to allow him the facility of a scribe for the selection 
test.
2. We clarify that the second respondent shall not insist on the requirement of a bench mark disability 
within the meaning of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016 for the facility of a scribe having 
due regard to the judgment of this Court in Vikas Kumar vs Union Public Service Commission and Others 
[(2021) 5 SCC 370].
3 Liberty to serve the Standing Counsel for the State of Bihar, who shall take instructions insofar as the 
fourth respondent is concerned.
4 List the Petition on 30 January 2023.
2	
For short, “the RPwD Act, 2016”
318
of this Court in Vikas Kumar v. Union Public Service Commission 
and Others.3 
2.1.	 Pursuant to the aforesaid order, the petitioner was provided 
with a scribe and compensatory time during the examinations 
conducted by the Respondent No.2 / State Bank of India, on 
12.11.2022 and 17.12.2022 respectively, for the posts of Clerk 
and Probationary Officer. 
3.	
Though at the first blush, the reliefs sought in this writ petition 
may appear to have become infructuous due to the efflux of time, 
considering the nature of the issue involved herein, we deem it fit and 
appropriate to delve into the same and arrive at a possible solution, 
so as to streamline the legal position which has been settled to an 
extent, and to ameliorate the plight of the persons with disabilities.4 
The pleadings raised by the parties are restricted to this specific scope. 
BRIEF FACTS
4.	
It is stated by the petitioner herein that he belongs to ‘Teli’ Caste 
which falls under the category of Other Backward Class in the State 
of Bihar. In 2017, soon after completing his degree, the petitioner 
was diagnosed with Focal Hand Dystonia, a type of Writer’s Cramp, 
classified as a chronic neurological condition. Under the RPwD 
Act, 2016, he was assessed with 25% permanent disability and 
was issued with a Unique Disability ID by the Primary Health Care 
Centre, Rajgir, Nalanda, Bihar. On 12.07.2021, after evaluation, 
the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences Centre 
(NIMHANS), Bangalore, issued a certificate in favour of the petitioner 
recognising his need for a scribe in written examinations. Pursuant to 
the same, he appeared for his post-graduate final year examination 
with the assistance of a scribe. Thereafter, he applied for various 
examinations conducted by different recruitment bodies, however, 
he was not provided with any facilities available to PwD candidates. 
According to him, such facilities were restricted only to the Persons 
with Benchmark Disabilities.5 Feeling aggrieved, the petitioner is 
before us.
3	
(2021) 5 SCC 370
4	
For short, “the PwD”
5	
For short, the “PwBD”
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
319
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
CONTENTIONS 
5.	
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner is 
a PwD as defined under Section 2(s) of the RPwD Act, 2016. In the 
application forms issued by the respondents for recruitment, there 
was no clause for PwD candidates to seek the facilities of scribe, 
compensatory time, etc. Such clause was made available only for PwBD 
candidates. As a result, the petitioner was unable to apply for these 
facilities and consequently, could not write the examination effectively. 
5.1.	 The learned counsel further pointed out that the respondents 
have acted in derogation to the principles enshrined by this Court 
in Vikash Kumar (supra), wherein, it was held that it would be 
discriminatory to restrict the facilities of a scribe for only PwBD 
candidates. That apart, in Avni Prakash v. National Testing 
Agency (NTA) & Others,6 this Court has emphatically clarified 
that Benchmark Disability is not a precondition to obtain a scribe 
or compensatory time in examinations. Despite the same, the 
respondents continue to remain oblivious to the actual legal 
position and ignorant towards their obligations. Therefore, the 
petitioner has come to this court with the present writ petition 
for the above stated relief.
6.	
Denying the averments made by the petitioner, the Respondent 
Nos.1, 2 and 4 filed separate replies in the form of counter affidavits, 
which were reiterated by their respective learned counsel, during 
the course of arguments before us. The learned counsel appearing 
for the Respondent No.3 also made his submissions. The sum and 
substance of the contentions raised on the side of the respondents 
are as follows: 
6.1.1.	 It is submitted that the Respondent No.1 / Institute of Banking 
Personnel Selection, Mumbai, is not a ‘State’ as defined under 
Article 12 of the Constitution of India and is, instead, a Public 
Trust registered under the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 and 
also a Society registered under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860. According to the Respondent No.1, it is not a 
statutory body established under any specific statute, but 
an autonomous body, that provides services to participating 
6	
2021 SCC Online SC 1112
320
banks and other organizations in conducting tests to fill up 
the actual reported vacancies. The activity of the Respondent 
No.1 in conducting the examination / selection is voluntary in 
nature and no public function is discharged by them. Further, 
it does not receive any financial aid from the Government 
or its entity and is not controlled in any manner either by 
the Government of India or its Departments. Moreover, in 
the judgment dated 29.04.2019 passed by this Court in Civil 
Appeal No.4455 of 2019 in Rajbir Surajbhan Singh vs. The 
Chairman, Institute of Banking Personnel Selection, Mumbai, 
it was specifically held that the Respondent No.1 is not 
amenable to the writ jurisdiction under Article 32 or Article 
226 of the Constitution of India. Thus, this writ petition is not 
maintainable against the Respondent No.1 and the same is 
liable to be dismissed on this ground alone. 
6.1.2.	 However, it is submitted that the Respondent No.1 has been 
acting in accordance with the judgments of this Court in Vikas 
Kumar (supra) and Avni Praksh (supra) as well as the Office 
Memorandum dated 10.08.2022 issued by the Respondent 
No.5 and the option to seek a scribe and compensatory time 
for the candidates mentioned in the said Office Memorandum 
will be duly incorporated into the application forms for all 
future examinations conducted by them. 
6.1.3.	 Additionally, it is submitted that the Respondent No.1 is 
merely a Service Provider to Respondent No.2 (SBI) and 
conducts online examination as per its mandate. It extends 
the facility of IBPS-Candidate Grievance Lodging and 
Redressal Mechanism to the aggrieved candidates. Thus, 
according to the Respondent No.1, it has neither violated 
the fundamental rights of the petitioner under Articles 14,19 
(I) (g) & 21 of the Constitution of India nor has it remained 
ignorant towards its obligation. 
6.2.	
It is submitted that the Respondent No.2 is a statutory body 
incorporated and constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 
1955. While submitting the application forms, the petitioner 
did not opt/ apply for the facility of a scribe. However, in 
accordance with the order of this court dated 15.12.2022, 
the Respondent No.2 permitted the petitioner to appear for 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
321
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
the examination, and the petitioner subsequently, wrote the 
examination with the assistance of a scribe and applicable 
compensatory time. Thus, according to the Respondent No.2, 
they have complied with the directions issued by this Court 
as well as the guidelines framed in the Official Memorandum 
dated 10.08.2022.
6.3.	
It is submitted that the Respondent No.4 / Bihar Staff Selection 
Commission is governed by section 8 of the Bihar Staff 
Selection Commission Act, 2002, which requires it to formulate 
procedure for selection for different services/posts with prior 
approval from the State Government. The State Government 
of Bihar vide Letter No. 3433 dated 09.10.2007 approved the 
procedure for selection for different services / posts, which 
included providing facilities of a scribe and extra time to blind 
or low vision candidates. Subsequently, vide Letter No. 9529 
dated 01.07.2015 the State Government extended the said 
facilities to candidates who are unable to write due to the 
permanent absence of hand/hands or those suffering from 
cerebral palsy. Finally, in view of the Office Memorandum 
dated 29.08.2018 issued by the Respondent No.5, the State 
Government issued Letter No. 11 / AA.-Nyay-30 /2021 Sa/Pra. 
10668 dated 29.06.2022 extending the benefits of providing 
facilities of a scribe and extra time to all the candidates with 
‘Benchmark Disabilities’. It is further submitted that as per 
clause 7(vi) of the advertisement published on 14.04.2022, 
the Respondent No.4 provided the benefits of scribe to PwBD 
i.e., Blind or low vision candidates, whose disability was 40% 
or more and who opted for such facilities. It is also submitted 
that the petitioner did not approach the Respondent No. 4 with 
a request to provide a scribe, and hence, he is not entitled 
to claim any relief in this writ petition. 
7.	
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel 
appearing for the parties and also perused the materials available 
on record.
LEGAL POSITION
8.	
Before proceeding further, we may take note of the legal framework 
and judicial precedents rendered by this Court as well as by other 
322
countries, connected to the issue involved herein. The RPwD Act, 
2016 emphasizes the rights of disabled persons to participate 
in examinations with necessary accommodations. The relevant 
provisions read as under: 
Section 2(m)
“Inclusive education” means a system of education wherein 
students with and without disability learn together and 
the system of teaching and learning is suitably adapted 
to meet the learning needs of different types of students 
with disabilities.
Section 2(y)
“Reasonable accommodation” means necessary and 
appropriate modification and adjustments, without imposing 
a disproportionate or undue burden in a particular case, 
to ensure to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or 
exercise of rights equally with others.
Section 2(h) 
“discrimination” in relation to disability, means any 
distinction, exclusion, restriction on the basis of disability 
which is the purpose or effect of impairing or nullifying the 
recognition, enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with 
others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in 
the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other 
field and includes all forms of discrimination and denial 
of reasonable accommodation.
Section 2(s)
“Person with disability” means a person with long term 
physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment which, 
in interaction with barriers, hinders his full and effective 
participation in society equally with others.
Section 2(r)
“Person with benchmark disability” means a person with 
not less than forty per cent of a specified disability where 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
323
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
specified disability has not been defined in measurable 
terms and includes a person with disability where specified 
disability has been defined in measurable terms, as certified 
by the certifying authority.
Section 16 
Duty of educational institutions. — The appropriate 
Government and the local authorities shall endeavour that 
all educational institutions funded or recognised by them 
provide inclusive education to the children with disabilities 
and towards that end shall—
(i)…
(ii)…
(iii) provide reasonable accommodation according to the 
individual’s requirements;
(iv) ….. (viii)
Section 17
Specific measures to promote and facilitate inclusive 
education. — The appropriate Government and the local 
authorities shall take the following measures for the 
purpose of section 16, namely: —
(a) .... (h)
(i) to make suitable modifications in the curriculum and 
examination system to meet the needs of students with 
disabilities such as extra time for completion of examination 
paper, facility of scribe or amanuensis, exemption from 
second and third language courses;
(j)….(k)…
Section 18
Adult education. — The appropriate Government and the 
local authorities shall take measures to promote, protect 
and ensure participation of persons with disabilities in 
adult education and continuing education programmers 
equally with others.
324
Indian decisions 
9.	
This Court has reinforced the rights of PwD through several landmark 
judgments, a few of which and the relevant observations therein are 
extracted below, for better appreciation:
(i)	
Vikash Kumar (supra):
“52. The principle of reasonable accommodation has 
found a more expansive manifestation in the 2016 
RPwD Act. Section 3 of the 2016 RPwD Act goes 
beyond a formal guarantee of non-discrimination 
by casting affirmative duties and obligations on 
the Government to protect the rights recognized in 
Section 3 by taking steps to utilize the capacity of 
persons with disabilities “by providing appropriate 
environment”. Among the obligations which are cast 
on the Government is the duty to take necessary 
steps to ensure reasonable accommodation for 
persons with disabilities. The concept of reasonable 
accommodation in Section 2(y) incorporates making 
“necessary and appropriate modification and 
adjustments” so long as they do not impose a 
disproportionate or undue burden in a particular case 
to ensure to persons with disability the enjoyment 
or exercise of rights equally with others. Equality, 
non- discrimination and dignity are the essence of 
the protective ambit of the 2016 RPwD Act.
56. Section 17(i) requires suitable modifications in 
the curriculum and examination system to meet 
the needs of students with disabilities such as: (i) 
extra time for completion of examination (ii) the 
facility of scribe or amanuensis (iii) exemption from 
second and third language courses. The guarantee 
under Section 17(i) is not confined to persons with 
benchmark disabilities but extends to students with 
disabilities. It is thus evident that the legislature 
has made a clear distinction between disability and 
benchmark disability. Section 20 provides a mandate 
of non-discrimination in employment. Under Section 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
325
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
21, every establishment is under a mandate to notify 
equal opportunity policies setting out the measures 
which will be adopted in pursuance of the provisions 
of Chapter IV. Chapter V provides guarantees for 
social security, health, rehabilitation and recreation 
to persons with disabilities.
57. When the Government in recognition of its 
affirmative duties and obligations under the 2016 
RPwD Act makes provisions for facilitating a scribe 
during the course of the Civil Services Examination, 
it cannot be construed to confer a largesse. Nor 
does it by allowing a scribe confer a privilege on a 
candidate. The provision for the facility of a scribe 
is in pursuance of the statutory mandate to ensure 
that persons with disabilities are able to live a life 
of equality and dignity based on respect in society 
for their bodily and mental integrity. There is a 
fundamental fallacy on the part of the UPSE/DoPT 
in proceeding on the basis that the facility of a 
scribe shall be made available only to persons with 
benchmark disabilities. This is occasioned by the 
failure of the MSJE to clarify their guidelines. The 
whole concept of a benchmark disability within the 
meaning of Section 2(r) is primarily in the context 
of special provisions including reservation that 
are embodied in Chapter VI of the 2016 RPwD 
Act. Conceivably, Parliament while mandating the 
reservation of posts in government establishments 
and of seats in institutions of higher learning was of 
the view that this entitlement should be recognized 
for persons with benchmark disabilities.
63. In the specific context of disability, the principle 
of reasonable accommodation postulates that the 
conditions which exclude the disabled from full and 
effective participation as equal members of society 
have to give way to an accommodative society which 
accepts difference, respects their needs and facilitates 
the creation of an environment in which the societal 
barriers to disability are progressively answered. 
326
Accommodation implies a positive obligation to create 
conditions conducive to the growth and fulfilment of the 
disabled in every aspect of their existence — whether 
as students, members of the workplace, participants 
in governance or, on a personal plane, in realising the 
fulfilling privacies of family life. The accommodation 
which the law mandates is “reasonable” because 
it has to be tailored to the requirements of each 
condition of disability. The expectations which every 
disabled person has are unique to the nature of the 
disability and the character of the impediments which 
are encountered as its consequence.
92. Before concluding, we also intend to issue a 
broader direction to the Union Government in the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to 
ensure the framing of proper guidelines which would 
regulate and facilitate the grant of a facility of a 
scribe to persons with disability within the meaning 
of Section 2(s) where the nature of the disability 
operates to impose a barrier to the candidate writing 
an examination. In formulating the procedures, the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment may lay 
down appropriate norms to ensure that the condition 
of the candidate is duly certified by such competent 
medical authority as may be prescribed so as to 
ensure that only genuine candidates in need of the 
facility are able to avail of it.
(ii)	
Avni Prakash (supra):
“Right to inclusive education
40. Education plays a key role in social and economic 
inclusion and effective participation in society. 
Inclusive education is indispensable for ensuring 
universal and non-discriminatory access to education. 
The Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
recognises that inclusive education systems must be 
put in place for a meaningful realisation of the right 
to education for PwD. Thus, a right to education is 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
327
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
essentially a right to inclusive education. In India, the 
RPwD Act, 2016 provides statutory backing to the 
principle of inclusive education. Section 2(m) defines 
“inclusive education” as:
“2. (m) “inclusive education” means a system of 
educationwherein students with and without disability 
learn together and the system of teaching and learning 
is suitably adapted to meet the learning needs of 
different types of students with disabilities;”
41. The RPwD Act, 2016 contains salutary provisions 
on the rights of PwD to inclusive education in 
Chapter  III. Section 17, which forms a part of 
Chapter III, entails specific measures to promote 
and facilitate inclusive education for students with 
disabilities. Among other inclusive measures in 
Section 17, is sub-section (i) which prescribes a duty 
to make suitable modifications in the curriculum and 
examination system to meet the needs of students 
with disabilities. This duty can be fulfilled by providing 
extra time for the completion of examination papers 
and/or the facility of a scribe. The provision of inclusive 
education is not limited to children with disabilities 
but extends to adults with disabilities. Section 18 
provides that the Government and local authorities 
are duty-bound to take measures to promote, protect 
and ensure participation of PwD in adult education and 
continuing education programmes on an equal footing 
with others. Chapter VI prescribes special provisions 
for persons with benchmark disabilities, including 
reservations in higher educational institutions of not 
less than 5% seats under Section 32.
42. The provisions for reservation in Chapter VI 
specifically for PwBD are distinct from the provisions 
in Chapter III for PwD. PwD encompasses a wider 
group of which PwBD is a sub-set. This distinction 
extends to efforts under Section 17 to promote 
inclusive education.
328
Above all, the RPwD Act, 2016 contains provisions 
mandating reasonable accommodation. The 
expression “reasonable accommodation” is defined 
in Section 2(y), which reads as under:
“2. (y) “reasonable accommodation” means 
necessary and appropriate modification and 
adjustments, without imposing a disproportionate 
or undue burden in a particular case, to ensure to 
persons with disabilities the enjoyment or exercise 
of rights equally with others;”
The right to inclusive education is realised through 
the provision of reasonable accommodation. In Vikash 
Kumar [Vikash Kumar v. UPSC, (2021) 5 SCC 370 
: (2021) 2 SCC (L&S) 1] , this Court emphasised 
that reasonable accommodation is at the heart 
of the principle of equality and non-discrimination 
espoused under the RPwD Act, 2016. The denial 
of reasonable accommodation to a PwD amounts 
to discrimination. It is the positive obligation of the 
State to create the necessary conditions to facilitate 
the equal participation of disabled persons in society. 
This Court observed thus : (SCC p. 399, para 44)
“44. The principle of reasonable accommodation 
captures the positive obligation of the State and 
private parties to provide additional support to persons 
with disabilities to facilitate their full and effective 
participation in society. The concept of reasonable 
accommodation is developed in Section (H) below. 
For the present, suffice it to say that, for a person with 
disability, the constitutionally guaranteed fundamental 
rights to equality, the six freedoms and the right to 
life under Article 21 will ring hollow if they are not 
given this additional support that helps make these 
rights real and meaningful for them. Reasonable 
accommodation is the instrumentality—are an 
obligation as a society—to enable the disabled to 
enjoy the constitutional guarantee of equality and 
non- discrimination.”
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
329
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
(iii)	 Arnab Roy v. Consortium of National Law Universities and 
Another7 
“24. In a situation such as the present, the Court 
must have due regard, undoubtedly to the need 
for reasonable accommodation consistent with the 
provisions of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Act, as interpreted in the decision in Vikash Kumar. 
Equally, it would not be appropriate to ignore the 
genuine concerns which have been set up on behalf 
of the Consortium bearing on the need to maintain 
the integrity of the entrance test.
25. It is from this perspective that the Consortium has, 
in its Guidelines required that the candidate should not 
be above the 11th standard and in addition should not 
be affiliated with any test-preparatory or examination 
coaching centre. At the highest, a candidate could 
have a grievance if no such scribe meeting the said 
description is available. But as already noted above, 
the Consortium has taken upon itself the obligation 
to provide a scribe who meets with the stipulations 
which are contained in the Guidelines.
26. In other words, candidates appearing for the CLAT 
can either bring their own scribe or if it not possible 
to do so, request the Consortium to provide a scribe 
who is then made available to the candidate. During 
the course of the hearing, it has been agreed that 
where the Consortium provides a scribe, at least two 
days’ time should be provided so as to enable the 
candidate to interact with the scribe. We are of the 
view that this is fair and proper. …”
10.	 Thus, it can be easily deduced from the above decisions that the 
principle of reasonable accommodation is central to ensure equality 
for all the persons with disabilities; and denying the facility of scribe 
or compensatory time, constitutes discrimination under the RPwD Act, 
2016. This Court also wishes to diminish the artificial distinction and 
7	
(2024) 5 SCC 793
330
bifurcation drawn between candidates with disabilities and those with 
benchmark disabilities (40% disabled or more) by extending various 
rights to candidates with disabilities that were earlier limited only to 
those with benchmark disabilities. Further, the examination bodies 
are stressed upon to implement accessibility measures, ensure that 
the examination centres are physically accessible and equipped to 
accommodate disabled candidates and ensure strict compliance of 
the RPwD Act, 2016 to prevent discrimination and provide equal 
opportunities for the persons with disabilities. 
Foreign decisions
11.	 The rights of the PwD have been recognized by the courts functioning 
in other countries. In this regard, a few of the decisions rendered 
by the foreign courts and the relevant paragraphs can be referred 
to as under: 
(i)	
MOORE v. BRITISH COLUMBIA (EDUCATION)8
“28.....It is accepted that students with disabilities 
require accommodation of their differences in order 
to benefit from educational services.
39. Notably, however, the 1985 Manual said that 
“special education shares the basic purpose of all 
education: the optimal development of individuals 
as skillful, free, and purposeful persons, able to 
plan and manage life and to realize highest potential 
as individuals and as members of society” (s. 3.1 
(emphasis added)). It added that “[a]ll children should 
be afforded opportunities to develop their full potential”
62. Meiorin and Grismer also directed that practices 
that are neutral on their face but have an unjustifiable 
adverse impact based on prohibited grounds will 
be subject to a requirement to “accommodate 
the characteristics of affected groups within their 
standards, rather than maintaining discriminatory 
standards supplemented by accommodation for those 
who cannot meet them” (Grismer, at para. 19).
8	
[2012] 3 SCR
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
331
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
(ii)	
Mental Disability Advocacy Center (MDAC) v. Bulgaria9 
[European Committee of Social Rights]
“37. The Committee considers that all education 
provided by states must fulfil the criteria of availability, 
accessibility, acceptability and adaptability. It notes 
in this respect General Comment No. 13 of the 
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights of the United Nations International Covenant 
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on the 
right to education. In the present case, the criteria 
of accessibility and adaptability are at stake, i.e. 
educational institutions and curricula have to be 
accessible to everyone, without discrimination and 
teaching has to be designed to respond to children 
with special speeds.”
(iii)	 International Association Autism Europe v. France10 [European 
Committee of Social Rights]
“48. As emphasised in the General Introduction 
to its Conclusions of 2003 (p. 10), the Committee 
views Article 15 of the Revised Charter as both 
reflecting and advancing a profound shift of values 
in all European countries over the past decade away 
from treating them as objects of pity and towards 
respecting them as equal citizens – an approach 
that the Council of Europe contributed to promote, 
with the adoption by the Committee of Ministers of 
Recommendation (92) 6 of 1992 on a coherent policy 
for people with disabilities. The underlying vision of 
Article 15 is one of equal citizenship for persons with 
disabilities and, fittingly, the primary rights are those 
of “independence, social integration and participation 
in the life of the community”. Securing a right to 
education for children and others with disabilities 
plays an obviously important role in advancing these 
citizenship rights. This explains why education is now 
9	
Decision in Complaint No. 41/2007 dated 03.06.2008
10	
Complaint No. 13/2002 
332
specifically mentioned in the revised Article 15 and 
why such an emphasis is placed on achieving that 
education “in the framework of general schemes, 
wherever possible”. It should be noted that Article 15 
applies to all persons with disabilities regardless of 
the nature and origin of their disability and irrespective 
of their age.
49. Article 17 is predicated on the need to ensure 
that children and young persons grow up in an 
environment which encourages the “full development 
of their personality and of their physical and mental 
capacities”. This approach is just as important for 
children with disabilities as it is for others and arguably 
more in circumstances where the effects of ineffective 
or untimely intervention are ever likely to be undone. 
The Committee views Article 17, which deals more 
generally, inter alia, with the right to education for 
all, as also embodying the modern approach of 
mainstreaming. Article 17(1), in particular, requires 
the establishment and maintenance of sufficient and 
adequate institutions and services for the purpose 
of education. Since Article 17(1) deals only with 
children and young persons it is important to read it 
in conjunction with Article 15(1) as far as adults are 
concerned.”
(iv)	 G.L. v. ITALY11 [European Court of Human Rights]
“52. As regards the prohibition set forth in Article 14 of 
the Convention, the Court reiterates that discrimination 
means treating differently, without an objective and 
reasonable justification, persons in similar situations, 
and that “no objective and reasonable justification” 
means that the distinction in issue does not pursue 
a “legitimate aim” or that there is not a “reasonable 
relationship of proportionality between the means 
employed and the aim sought to be realised”.
11	
Judgment in Application no. 59751/15 dated 10.12.2020
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
333
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
53. When examining a case under Article 14 of 
the Convention, the Court must have regard to 
developments in international and European law and 
respond, for example, to any emerging consensus 
as to the standards to be achieved. To that effect, 
the Court notes the importance of the fundamental 
principles of universality and non-discrimination in 
the exercise of the right to education, which are 
enshrined in many international. It further emphasises 
that those instruments have recognised inclusive 
education, aimed at promoting equal opportunities 
for all, particularly for persons with disabilities. 
Inclusive education therefore forms part of the States’ 
international responsibility in this sphere.”
(v)	
T.H. v. BULGARIA12 [European Court of Human Rights]
“109. In that context the Court considers it sufficient 
to emphasise that:
(a) Article 14 of the Convention prohibits discrimination 
on grounds of disability, which falls under the rubric 
“other status”; 
(b) Such discrimination can consist not only in less 
favourable treatment on grounds of a disability without 
a reasonable and objective justification but also in 
a failure to provide “reasonable accommodation” for 
someone with a disability; 
(c) The notion of “reasonable accommodation” 
in this context must be understood in the sense 
ascribed to it by Article 2 of the 2006 United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(2515 UNTS 3) 1, in whose light Article 14 of the 
Convention must be read when being applied in this 
domain: “necessary and appropriate modification 
and adjustments not imposing a disproportionate or 
undue burden, where needed in a particular case, to 
12	
Judgment in Application no. 46519/20 dated 11.07.2023
334
ensure to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or 
exercise on an equal basis with others of all human 
rights and fundamental freedoms;
(d) “Reasonable accommodation” in the field of 
education can take different material or non-material 
forms – for instance, teacher training, curricular 
adaptation or appropriate facilities, depending in 
particular on the disability in question – and it is not 
for the Court to define its modalities in a given case, 
the national authorities being much better placed 
to do so, it being emphasised however that those 
authorities must take great care with the choices that 
they make in this respect.”
(vi)	 XXXX v HR Rail SA13
“38. In that regard, it should be recalled that Directive 
2000/78 must, as far as possible, be interpreted in a 
manner that is consistent with the UN Convention. 
Article 2, third indent of the UN Convention provides 
that discrimination on the grounds of disability 
includes all forms of discrimination, including denial 
of reasonable accommodation.”
12.	 Thus, it is clear from the above that the rights of disabled persons 
are less instructive and more general and that, right to education, 
right to equality, and right against discrimination accorded to them 
will only be truly realized, when State structures form policies, laws, 
and rules to provide equal access and reasonable accommodation 
to such persons. 
DISCUSSION
13.	 The law is settled that all the benefits given to PwBD candidates 
must also be extended to PwD candidates, and there can be no 
discrimination between the candidates in granting facilities such as 
scribes, compensatory time, etc., except for reservation, in writing 
13	
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber) dated 10.02.2022 in Case C‐485/20
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
335
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
the examinations. Earlier, the office memorandum dated 29.08.201814 
came to be issued, dealing with the entitlements and benefits for 
PwBD candidates for all examinations irrespective of its nature and 
irrespective of the authority conducting the examination. 
14.	 Notably, the Respondent No.5 issued Office Memorandum dated 
10.08.2022, in compliance with the directions issued by this Court 
in Vikash Kumar (Supra). In the said Office Memorandum, based 
on the recommendation of the Expert Committee, certain guidelines 
were issued for conducting written examination for persons with 
specified disabilities covered under the definition of Section 2(s) 
of the RPwD Act, 2016, but not covered under the definition of 
Section 2(r) of the said Act, i.e. persons having less than 40% 
disability and having difficulty in writing. For better appreciation, 
the relevant paragraphs of the said Office Memorandum read as 
under:
“2. Keeping in view the above order of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, an Expert Committee was constituted to 
consider the issue and suggest guidelines accordingly. The 
Committee noted that there are various types of clinical 
problems that can affect the writing capacity. After careful 
consideration of the matter, the Committee recommended 
that sole criteria for grant of scribe and compensatory 
time should be based on assessment of the capability of 
a person to write.
3. The Committee accordingly recommended the following 
guidelines for conducting written examination for persons 
with specified disabilities covered under the definition of 
Section 2(s) of the RPwD Act, 2016 but not covered under 
the definition of Section 2(r) of the said Act, i.e. persons 
having less than 40% disability and having difficulty in 
writing.
(a)………
(b) The facility of scribe and/or compensatory time shall be 
granted solely to those having difficulty in writing subject 
to production of a certificate to the effect that person 
14	
For short, “the 2018 OM”
336
concerned has limitation to write and that scribe is essential 
to write examination on his/her behalf from the competent 
medical authority of a Government healthcare institution 
as per proforma at Appendix-1.
(c) The medical authority for the purpose of certification as 
mentioned in point (b) above should be a multi-member 
authority comprising the following:-
i. Chief Medical officer/Civil Surgeon/Chief District Medical 
Officer..... Chairperson
ii. Orthopaedic/PMR specialist
iii. Neurologist, if available*
iv. Clinical Psychologist/Rehabilitation Psychologist/ 
Psychiatrist/Special Educator
v. Occupational therapist, if available*
vi. Any other expert based on the condition of the candidate 
as may be nominated by the Chairperson.
(* the Chief Medical Officer/Civil Surgeon/Chief District 
Medical Officer may make full efforts for inclusion of 
neurologists, occupational therapist from the nearest 
District or the Medical College/Institute, if the same is not 
available in the District)”
(d) The candidate should have the discretion of opting for 
his own scribe or request the Examination Body for the 
same. The examination body may also identify the scribe 
to make panels at the District/Division/State level as per 
the requirements of the examination. In later instances 
the candidates should be allowed to meet the scribe 
two days before the examination so that the candidates 
get a chance to check and verify whether the scribe is 
suitable or not.
(e) In case the examination body provides the scribe, it 
shall be ensured that qualification of the scribe should 
not be more than the minimum qualification criteria of 
the examination. However, the qualification of the scribe 
should always be matriculate or above.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
337
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
In case the candidate is allowed to bring his own scribe, 
the qualification of the scribe should be one step below 
the qualification of the candidate taking examination. The 
person opting for own scribe should submit details of the 
own scribe as per proforma at Appendix-II.
(f) There should also be flexibility in accommodating any 
change in scribe in case of emergency. The candidates 
should also be allowed to take different scribe for writing 
different papers especially for languages. However, there 
can be only one scribe per subject.’
(g) The candidate should be allowed to use aids and 
assistive devices such as prosthetics & orthotics, hearing 
aid as mentioned in para 2 of the certificate issued by 
medical authority as per Appendix I.
(h) Compensatory time not less than 20 minutes per hour 
of the examination should be allowed for persons who 
are eligible for getting scribe. In case the duration of the 
examination is less than an hour, then the duration of the 
compensatory time should be allowed on pro-rata basis. 
Compensatory time should not be less than 5 minutes 
and should be in the multiple of 5.
(i) The examination bodies shall modify their application 
forms to incorporate specific needs of this category of 
persons. In case, any incident has been reported after 
filling up the form, the examination bodies shall inform 
the candidates to obtain medical certificate as per 
these guidelines for facilitating grant of scribe and/or 
compensatory time.
(j) As far as possible the examination for such persons may 
be held at ground floor. The examination centres should 
be accessible for persons with disabilities.
(k) These guidelines are applicable to written examinations 
conducted by central recruitment agencies as well 
as academic institutions. The States/UTs may adopt 
these guidelines or issue similar guidelines to maintain 
uniformity.
338
(l) These guidelines are independent of the Guidelines for 
conducting written examination for persons with benchmark 
disabilities issued by the Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities on 29.08.2018.
(m) The examining bodies shall ensure strict vigilance to 
check misuse of facility of scribe.
4. All the recruitment agencies, Academics/Examination 
Bodies etc. under the administrative control of each 
Ministry/Department may be advised appropriately to 
ensure compliance of implementing these guidelines.
5. The above guidelines are issued with the approval of 
Hon’ble Minister (Social Justice & Empowerment).
14.1.	The aforesaid Office Memorandum dated 10.08.2022 was 
forwarded by the Government of India, Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Financial Services, vide communication No.FZ-
3/3/2022-SCT dated 10.11.2022 to all recruitment agencies / 
examination bodies, for strict compliance.
15.	 It is the grievance of the petitioner herein that though the aforesaid 
Office Memorandum dated 10.08.2022 came to be issued by the 
Respondent No.5 in accordance with the directions of this Court, it 
fails to incorporate the essence of reasonable accommodation and 
underscores the true meaning and purpose of the RPwD Act, 2016. 
According to the petitioner, the said Office Memorandum contains 
the following defects:
(i)	
As per the directions of this Court in Vikash Kumar (supra) and 
Avni Prakash (supra), all conditions/benefits found in Paras I to 
XVII of the 2018 OM relating to PwBD candidates, were required 
to be extended to PwD candidates. However, the Respondent 
No.5 came up with a separate Office Memorandum granting 
selective facilities, without any justification for restricting the 
facilities for PwD candidates. 
(ii)	
The Judgment in Vikash Kumar (supra) mandates that any 
disability imposing a barrier to a candidate writing an examination 
should be remedied by extending the necessary facilities. In 
the case of blind or low vision candidates, the disability does 
not prevent them from “writing” per se, but it certainly imposes 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
339
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
a barrier to writing the examination. However, clause (3) of the 
Office Memorandum only extends facilities to candidates who 
have “difficulty in writing”. Furthermore, Clause 3(b) of the Office 
Memorandum creates confusion and a problematic situation, 
where the rights of PwD candidates to receive facilities in 
examinations can be denied simply because their disability is 
not related to “writing”. This contradicts the entire purpose of 
the Act. Therefore, this court may direct the Respondent No.5 
to strike down the restrictions in clause (3) and 3(b) and extend 
examination relaxations to all PwD candidates, regardless of 
the nature, type, or form of disability.
(iii)	 The Office Memorandum does not provide for any facilities 
other than a scribe and compensatory time. For instance, the 
2018 OM includes provisions that as far as possible, PwBD 
candidates should have the option to choose the mode of taking 
the examination, such as in Braille, on a computer, in large print, 
or even by recording their answers. These are also feasible as 
examining bodies can easily use technology to convert question 
papers into large prints, e-text or Braille, and can also convert 
Braille text into English or regional languages. However, the same 
does not find any mention in the said Office Memorandum. The 
Office Memorandum also sets specific criteria (both educational 
and otherwise) for a scribe. Quite often, candidates face 
significant challenges in finding a suitable scribe and ensuring 
their presence on the day of the examination. At the same time, 
while the 2018 OM allowed candidates to use a computer or 
other technological means for taking the exam, this option was 
not extended to PwD candidates in the present OM. Therefore, 
the petitioner states that if candidates are permitted to type their 
answers on computers, it would eliminate the need for a scribe 
and also address the concerns of the examining body regarding 
malpratice by reducing human interaction.
(iv)	 The Office Memorandum fails to prescribe a grievance redressal 
mechanism to address instances where any relaxations are 
denied to PwD candidates. As a result, the only remedy 
available to such candidates who are denied the benefit of 
such relaxations, is to approach a writ court and seek redress 
for the grievance.
340
15.1.	 The petitioner further highlighted the problems and 
inconveniences faced by him during the examination 
process, which are as follows: (i) The application forms for 
recruitment did not include provisions for PwD candidates, 
and the requisite facilities were only provided upon specific 
requests from applicants; (ii) Compensatory time was 
not displayed on the screen, leading to a failure by the 
invigilators to provide the facility to PwD candidates; (iii) 
Some recruitment agencies refused to provide the facilities 
of a scribe and extra time to PwD candidates, citing that 
such provisions were contrary to the policy decisions of 
their respective departments; (iv) In certain cases, the 
facilities of a scribe and extra time were denied because 
the invigilators were not informed about the court orders 
mandating strict compliance with such provisions; (v) In 
various examinations, the benefits were provided only to 
PwBD candidates, due to a lack of coordination and proper 
implementation. Thus, according to the petitioner, these 
issues have a serious detrimental effect on the candidates, 
and as a result, the guidelines framed by Respondent No. 
5 should be reconsidered and amended.
16.	 On the other hand, the respondents categorically stated in their 
replies and submissions that they have been following the directions 
of this Court as well as the guidelines issued by Respondent No. 5 
in the Office Memorandum dated 10.08.2022. 
17.	 However, there have been instances where examination bodies 
refused to extend the benefits available to PwD candidates due to 
the absence of a clear-cut grievance redressal mechanism, which 
continues to cause inconvenience and injustice to several candidates, 
including the petitioner herein. Further, the petitioner demonstrated 
that there are certain defects and lacunas in the guidelines issued 
by Respondent No. 5, as well as in the implementation of this 
Court’s directions, resulting in different authorities following disparate 
procedures. This lack of uniformity causes confusion, discrimination, 
and undermines the efficiency and effectiveness of the examination 
process. Therefore, in our opinion, there is an urgent need for 
a uniform memorandum for examinations applicable to all PwD 
candidates, and it is the responsibility of Respondent No. 5 to ensure 
its proper and just compliance.
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
341
Gulshan Kumar v. Institute of Banking Personnel Selection & Ors.
18.	 It is also to be pointed out that the constitution bench of this Court 
in Kaushal Kishor v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others15 considered 
the question as to whether fundamental rights under Articles 19 and 
21 of the Constitution can be claimed against anyone who is not a 
state instrumentality, and answered the same in the affirmative with 
a majority of 4:1. It was clarified that rights under Articles 19 and 
21 can be enforced even against private entities and it overrides 
the principle laid down in Rajbir (supra). Hence, the contention of 
the Respondent No.1 that they are not amenable to writ jurisdiction 
cannot be countenanced by us. It is noteworthy mentioning that the 
Office Memorandum clearly stated that the guidelines are applicable 
to all the authorities. As such, the benefits conferred by the statute 
should be provided for all the PwD candidates and they cannot be 
denied on the ground of absence of accountability and/or lack of 
duty on enforceability.
19.	 In the ultimate analysis, we are of the considered view that the 
guidelines issued by the Respondent No.5 pursuant to the directions 
of this Court, have to be enforced, by extending the benefits for PwBD 
candidates to all PwD candidates in writing their examinations, without 
any hindrance. Accordingly, we direct the Respondent No.5 to revisit 
the Office Memorandum dated 10.08.2022, remove the restrictions 
and grant relaxations in a reasonable manner and incorporate the 
following aspects and thereby, re-notify the same afresh, within a 
period of two months: 
(i)	
direct all the authorities / recruitment agencies / examining bodies 
to uniformly follow the guidelines issued by the Respondent 
No.5, which is the nodal agency and ensure strict adherence 
through periodic surveys / verification;
(ii)	
carry out periodic sensitization drive at educational institutions 
to raise awareness among the examination conducting bodies 
so as to ensure that the OMs are effectively implemented;
(iii)	 set up a grievance redressal portal to register complaints, 
which would permit the candidates to approach it first before 
approaching the court of law;
(iv)	 inspect the guidelines framed by different authorities and re-
notify the existing guidelines with an aim to ensure compliance; 
15	
Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 113 of 2016
342
(v)	
extend the validity of the scribe certificate (currently being valid 
only for 6 months) to prevent the long wait time after applying, 
especially, in rural areas;
(vi)	 set up Incentive programs for scribes to ensure their availability 
and provide necessary training; 
(vii)	 provide some time prior to the examination to allow the 
candidates to familiarize themselves with the scribe to ensure 
that there is a sense of comfort while communicating with the 
scribe during the examination; 
(viii)	 offer PwD candidates a choice of examination modes, such 
as scribe, braille, large print, audio recording of answers, etc.; 
(ix)	 take penal action against authorities / officials in charge of 
decision- making process, who fail to follow the guidelines set 
out by the Respondent No.5 and formulate guidelines which 
exclude PwD; 
(x)	
sensitise the persons working for the respondent authorities, 
and train them on a regular basis, to address the reasonable 
accommodation needs of PwDs; and
(xi)	 ensure strict compliance of the letter and spirit of the judgments 
in Vikash Kumar and Avni Prakash as well as the provisions 
of the RPwD Act, 2016, with a special focus on ‘reasonable 
accommodation’.
20.	 With the aforesaid directions, this writ petition stands disposed of. 
No costs. Connected Miscellaneous application(s), if any, shall stand 
disposed of.
Post the matter after two months “for reporting compliance”.
Result of the case: Writ petition disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain