[2025] 5 S.C.R. 78 : 2025 INSC 473
Rakesh Kumar Verma 
v. 
HDFC Bank Ltd. 
(Civil Appeal No. 2282 of 2025)
08 April 2025
[Dipankar Datta* and Manmohan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether civil suits could have been instituted in courts 
in Patna and Delhi by employees in view of the specific clauses in 
the appointment letter that courts in Mumbai would have exclusive 
jurisdiction to decide disputes by and between the contracting 
parties. 
Headnotes†
Contract Act, 1872 – s.28 – Agreements in restraint of legal 
proceedings – Exclusive jurisdiction of courts – Appointment of 
two employees by the respondent Bank, one in Patna and other 
in Delhi and exclusive jurisdiction clause in the appointment 
letter that the courts in Mumbai will have jurisdiction with 
regard to any dispute – Termination of the service of both 
the employees due to allegations of fraud and misconduct – 
Employee appointed in Patna, instituted civil suit in Patna – 
Thereafter, the Bank filed petition u/Ord. 7 r.11 for rejection of 
the plaint since the courts in Mumbai had jurisdiction and not 
the court where the suit was instituted – Trial court dismissed 
the same – Revisional application thereagainst by the bank, 
allowed by the Patna High Court – In case of the suit filed by 
the employee appointed in Delhi challenging the termination, 
the trial court in Delhi held that jurisdiction clause did not fully 
oust the jurisdiction of courts in Delhi – Revisional application 
by the Bank, dismissed by the Delhi High Court – Correctness:
Held: Bank justified in its claim that suits ought to have been 
instituted in Mumbai – Upon a perusal of the service contract and 
the exclusive jurisdiction clause, the Patna High Court offered a 
sound legal opinion while the Delhi High Court erred in dismissing 
the revisional application – For an exclusive jurisdiction clause 
* Author
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
79
Rakesh Kumar Verma v. HDFC Bank Ltd. 
to be valid, it should be in consonance with s.28, it should not 
absolutely restrict any party from initiating legal proceedings 
pertaining to the contract; the Court given exclusive jurisdiction 
must be competent to have such jurisdiction; and the parties must 
either impliedly or explicitly confer jurisdiction on a specific set of 
courts – Contracting parties were ad idem on the terms of the 
appointment letter/employment agreement which specified courts 
in Mumbai exclusively as the situs of dispute resolution – As long 
as an employment contract does not offend the provisions of any 
applicable legislation there should be no reason to interfere – Law 
treats all contracts with equal respect and unless a contract is 
proved to suffer from any of the vitiating factors, the terms and 
conditions have to be enforced regardless of the relative strengths 
and weakness of the parties – Exclusive jurisdiction clause does 
not take away the right of the employee to pursue a legal claim 
but only restricts the employee to pursue those claims before the 
courts in Mumbai alone – Courts in Mumbai did have jurisdiction – 
Clause in the contract clearly and explicitly barred the jurisdiction 
of all other courts by using the word “exclusive” – Impugned 
judgment of the Delhi High Court set aside and that of the Patna 
High Court affirmed to the extent stated – Patna High Court, while 
correctly holding in favour of Bank on the point of law, committed 
a fundamental error by allowing the application of the Bank u/
Ord. VII, r.11 CPC that the plaint stands rejected – Proper course 
for the Patna High Court would have been to direct return of the 
plaint by the trial court u/Ord.7 r.10 for its presentation before the 
competent court in Mumbai – Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – O.7 
r.11. [Paras 18, 21, 23, 26, 29-33, 38]
Case Law Cited
Swastik Gases (P) Ltd. v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd [2013] 7 SCR 
581 : (2013) 9 SCC 32 – relied on.
Vishal Gupta v. L & T Finance, 2009 SCC OnLine Delhi 2806 – 
disapproved.
Hakam Singh v. Gammon (India) Ltd. [1971] 3 SCR 314 : (1971) 1 
SCC 286; Globe Transport Corpn. v. Triveni Engg. Works (1983) 4 
SCC 707; A.B.C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd. v. A.P. Agencies, Salem [1989] 2 
SCR 1 : (1989) 2 SCC 163; Patel Roadways Ltd. v. Prasad Trading 
Co. [1991] 3 SCR 391 : (1991) 4 SCC 270; Angile Insulations v. 
80
Supreme Court Reports
Davy Ashmore India Ltd. [1995] 3 SCR 443 : (1995) 4 SCC 153; 
New Moga Transport Co. v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. [2004] 
Supp. 1 SCR 623 : (2004) 4 SCC 677; Shree Subhlaxmi Fabrics 
(P) Ltd. v. Chand Mal Baradia [2005] 2 SCR 1138 : (2005) 10 
SCC 704; Rajasthan SEB v. Universal Petrol Chemicals 
Ltd. [2009] 1 SCR 138 : (2009) 3 SCC 107; A.V.M. Sales 
Corpn. v. Anuradha Chemicals (P) Ltd. [2012] 1 SCR 318 : 
(2012) 2 SCC 315 – referred to.
List of Acts
 Contract Act, 1872; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
List of Keywords
Rejection of plaint; Return of plaint; Exclusive jurisdiction of courts; 
Agreement in restraint of legal proceedings; Contract of service; 
Employment agreement; Situs of dispute resolution; Barring of 
jurisdiction; Right of the employee to pursue a legal claim; Exclusive 
jurisdiction clause in the appointment letter/employment agreement; 
Termination of service; Allegations of fraud and misconduct; 
Revisional application.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2282 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.01.2022 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Patna in CR No. 23 of 2020
With 
Civil Appeal No. 2286 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Narender Hooda, Sr. Adv., Rishab Raj Jain, Ms. Kajal Sharma, 
Grijesh Kumar, Ms. Amiti Gupta, Udayan Jain, Sonal Jain, Sandeep 
S Deshmukh, Vatsalya Vigya, Pradeep Kumar Tripathi. 
Advs. for the Respondent:
Narender Hooda, Sr. Adv., G.S. Chaturvedi, Shantanu Chatuervedi, 
Ms. Priyanka Tyagi, Surya Kant, Rishab Raj Jain, Ms. Kajal Sharma, 
Grijesh Kumar, Ms. Amiti Gupta, Udayan Jain, Sonal Jain. 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
81
Rakesh Kumar Verma v. HDFC Bank Ltd. 
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Dipankar Datta, J.
The Challenge
1.	
In the lead appeal1, Rakesh has called in question the judgment and 
order of the High Court of Judicature at Patna2 dated 25th January, 
2022, allowing a civil revisional application3 filed by HDFC Bank. 
2.	
In the connected appeal4, HDFC Bank has taken exception to the 
judgment and order of the High Court of Delhi5 dated 12th November, 
2011, dismissing its civil revisional application6.
The Facts 
3.	
The lead appeal rests on a simple set of facts, which are as follows: 
I.	
Vide letter dated 24th July, 2002, HDFC Bank appointed Rakesh 
on the post of Executive, Transaction Banking Group (Operation), 
in the Wholesale Banking Operations. Pursuant thereto, Rakesh 
joined his service at Wholesale Banking Operations at Exhibition 
Road, Patna. 
II.	
The appointment letter of Rakesh had an exclusive jurisdiction 
clause, reading as under: 
“The terms and conditions set out in this letter of 
appointment constitute service conditions applicable to 
your employment in the Bank and with regard to any 
dispute thereof, the Bombay Courts will have exclusive 
jurisdiction.”
III.	
Service of Rakesh was terminated on 28th August, 2016 due to 
allegations of fraud and misconduct. 
1	
Civil Appeal No. 2282/2025
2	
Patna High Court, hereafter
3	
Civil Revision No. 23 of 2020
4	
Civil Appeal No. 2286/2025
5	
Delhi High Court, hereafter
6	
Civil Revision Petition No. 79/2021
82
Supreme Court Reports
IV.	
Aggrieved thereby, Rakesh instituted a civil suit7 in the court of 
the Sub-Judge-1, Patna, seeking the following relief:
“a) Declaration that termination letter dated 28.06.2016 
being annexure – C hereto is illegal, arbitrary, 
unreasonable, unwarranted, unconstitutional, mala 
fide, bad in law as well as without jurisdiction, violative 
of … illegible … on facts, principles of natural justice 
and the same may be adjudged null and void and 
cancelled.
b) Ad-interim injunction restraining the defendants 
from giving any effect to the termination letter dated 
28.06.2016 and further directing the defendants 
to forthwith reinstate the plaintiff in service with all 
consequential benefits.
c) Direction to the defendants to reinstate forthwith 
the plaintiff in service with all consequential benefits 
including the arrears of salary with 18% interest per 
annum.”
V.	
On receipt of summons, HDFC Bank filed a petition under Order 
VII, Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 19088 for rejection 
of the plaint on the ground that it is the courts in Mumbai which 
have jurisdiction and not the court where the suit was instituted. 
VI.	 The petition filed by HDFC Bank came to be dismissed by the 
trial court, vide order dated 14th December, 2018. 
VII.	 Dissatisfied with the dismissal of the said petition, HDFC Bank 
filed the revisional application before the Patna High Court, 
which has since succeeded. 
4.	
The connected appeal too rests on similar set of facts, which are 
as follows: 
I.	
Deepti was appointed as “Clerk” in Lord Krishna Bank, which was 
merged with HDFC Bank in 2009. Vide Employment Agreement 
dated 23rd March, 2009, Deepti was appointed as an officer in 
the Retail Banking Branch at Janak Puri, Delhi. This agreement 
7	
Title Suit No. 212 of 2017
8	
CPC 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
83
Rakesh Kumar Verma v. HDFC Bank Ltd. 
also included a similar exclusive jurisdiction clause as the one 
in the case of Rakesh. In terms thereof, any dispute between 
the parties leading to legal action had to be thrashed out in the 
competent court in Mumbai. 
II.	
Service of Deepti was terminated on 31st May, 2017, also due 
to allegations of fraud and misconduct. 
III.	
Aggrieved thereby, Deepti instituted a civil suit9 in the court of 
the Senior Civil Judge, Rohini Courts, Delhi, seeking inter alia 
the following relief: 
“a) Declare the termination letter dated 31.05.2017 
as null and void since the same is illegal and quash 
the same;
b) Direct the Defendant to reinstate the Plaintiff in 
service with all consequential benefits including back 
wages and continuity of services.”
IV.	
HDFC Bank filed its written statement stating that the cause 
of action arose wholly in Mumbai and the courts in Delhi have 
no jurisdiction.
V.	
The trial court, vide order dated 17th April, 2021, answered the 
preliminary issue as to whether it had jurisdiction to try the suit 
and held that the exclusive jurisdiction clause did not fully oust 
the jurisdiction of the courts in Delhi. 
VI.	 Dissatisfied with the order of the trial court, HDFC Bank filed the 
civil revisional application before the Delhi High Court which, 
as noted above, stands dismissed.
The Impugned Judgments 
5.	
The impugned judgment in the lead appeal, after condoning the delay 
in filing of the civil revisional application, allowed the same on the 
ground that courts in Patna do not have the jurisdiction in light of the 
exclusive jurisdiction clause and that such a clause would operate 
in matters of termination of service too. Relying on the decision of 
the Supreme Court in Swastik Gases (P) Ltd. v. Indian Oil Corpn. 
9	
Civil Suit No. 1164 of 2017
84
Supreme Court Reports
Ltd.,10 the Patna High Court observed that while the general principle 
is that the suit could be instituted at any place where a substantial 
part of the cause of action arises, however, when a clause such as 
the one in the instant case exists, the jurisdiction will lie with the court 
at the place which has been expressly agreed to by and between 
the parties, i.e., the courts in Bombay in the instant case. 
6.	
The impugned judgment and order in the connected appeal dismissed 
the civil revisional application on the ground that Deepti was residing 
in Delhi, was working in Rohini, Delhi and the termination letter was 
served upon her in Delhi and that the exclusive jurisdiction clause in 
the employment agreement did not oust the jurisdiction of the courts 
in Delhi. The learned Judge relied on the decision of a coordinate 
Bench of the Delhi High Court in Vishal Gupta v. L & T Finance11 
while declining to grant relief to HDFC Bank in exercise of revisional 
jurisdiction.
The Question
7.	
The pure question of law arising for decision on these appeals is, 
whether the civil suits could have been instituted in courts in Patna 
and Delhi by Rakesh and Deepti, respectively, in view of the specific 
clause(s) in the appointment letter/employment agreement that the 
courts in Mumbai would have exclusive jurisdiction to decide disputes 
by and between the contracting parties? 
Analysis and Reasons
8.	
Before we proceed to appreciate the rival claims, it would be 
appropriate to notice the applicable legal regime. 
9.	
Section 28 of the Indian Contract Act, 187212 ordains: 
28. Agreements in restraint of legal proceedings, 
void. — Every agreement,— 
(a) by which any party thereto is restricted absolutely from 
enforcing his rights under or in respect of any contract, 
by the usual legal proceedings in the ordinary tribunals, 
10	
(2013) 9 SCC 32
11	
2009 SCC OnLine Delhi 2806
12	
Contract Act 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
85
Rakesh Kumar Verma v. HDFC Bank Ltd. 
or which limits the time within which he may thus enforce 
his rights; or 
(b) which extinguishes the rights of any party thereto, or 
discharges any party thereto, from any liability, under or in 
respect of any contract on the expiry of a specified period 
so as to restrict any party from enforcing his rights, is void 
to the extent.
…”
10.	 It is also important to refer to Section 20 of the CPC which is 
reproduced hereunder: 
20. Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside 
or cause of action arises. — Subject to the limitations 
aforesaid, every suit shall be instituted in a Court within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction— 
(a) the defendant, or each of the defendants where there 
are more than one, at the time of the commencement 
of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on 
business, or personally works for gain; or 
(b) any of the defendants, where there are more than one, 
at the time of the commencement of the suit, actually and 
voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally 
works for gain, provided that in such case either the leave 
of the Court is given, or the defendants who do not reside, 
or carry on business, or personally works for gain, as 
aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution; or 
(c) The cause of action, wholly or in part, arises. 
Explanation. —A corporation shall be deemed to carry on 
business at its sole or principal office in India or, in respect 
of any cause of action arising at any place where it has 
also a subordinate office, at such place.
11.	 This is the umpteenth time that this Court has been called upon to 
deal with a clause in contracts restricting adjudication of disputes 
exclusively to the jurisdiction of a court of a party’s choice, not 
disagreed by the other party.13 In fact, the principles pertaining 
13	
exclusive jurisdiction clause
86
Supreme Court Reports
to institution of suits and the jurisdiction of the courts in a case 
where the parties have by agreement, conferred jurisdiction on 
courts at a particular place, have been laid down by this Court 
in numerous cases which are entirely consistent and have not 
required a relook. A perusal of a couple of these decisions may 
not be inapt for a proper decision on these appeals. 
12.	 This Court in Hakam Singh v. Gammon (India) Ltd.14 held that: 
4. The Code of Civil Procedure in its entirety applies to 
proceedings under the Arbitration Act. The jurisdiction 
of the courts under the Arbitration Act to entertain a 
proceeding for filing an award is accordingly governed 
by the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. By 
clause 13 of the agreement it was expressly stipulated 
between the parties that the contract shall be deemed 
to have been entered into by the parties concerned in 
the city of Bombay. In any event the respondents have 
their principal office in Bombay and they were liable 
in respect of a cause of action arising under the terms 
of the tender to be sued in the courts at Bombay. It 
is not open to the parties by agreement to confer by 
their agreement jurisdiction on a Court which it does 
not possess under the Code. But where two courts or 
more have under the Code of Civil Procedure jurisdiction 
to try a suit or proceeding an agreement between the 
parties that the dispute between them shall be tried 
in one of such Courts is not contrary to public policy. 
Such an agreement does not contravene Section 28 
of the Contract Act.
(emphasis supplied)
13.	 A decade later, another coordinate Bench had the occasion to deal 
with a similar exclusive jurisdiction clause in Globe Transport 
Corpn. v. Triveni Engg. Works.15 One sentence in paragraph 3 
captures the essence of the law, reading as follows:
14	
(1971) 1 SCC 286 
15	
(1983) 4 SCC 707
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
87
Rakesh Kumar Verma v. HDFC Bank Ltd. 
3. It is now settled law that it is not competent to the parties 
by agreement to invest a court with jurisdiction which it 
does not otherwise possess but if there are more than one 
forums where a suit can be filed, it is open to the parties 
to select a particular forum and exclude the other forums 
in regard to claims which one party may have against the 
other under a contract. …
14.	 A few years later came the decision in A.B.C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd. v. 
A.P. Agencies, Salem.16 This Court held that:
21. From the foregoing decisions it can be reasonably 
deduced that where such an ouster clause occurs, it is 
pertinent to see whether there is ouster of jurisdiction of 
other courts. When the clause is clear, unambiguous and 
specific accepted notions of contract would bind the parties 
and unless the absence of ad idem can be shown, the 
other courts should avoid exercising jurisdiction. As regards 
construction of the ouster clause when words like “alone”, 
“only”, “exclusive” and the like have been used there may 
be no difficulty. Even without such words in appropriate 
cases the maxim “expressio unius est exclusio alterius” 
— expression of one is the exclusion of another — may 
be applied. What is an appropriate case shall depend on 
the facts of the case. In such a case mention of one thing 
may imply exclusion of another. When certain jurisdiction 
is specified in a contract an intention to exclude all others 
from its operation may in such cases be inferred. It has 
therefore to be properly construed.
15.	 In Swastik Gases (P) Ltd. (supra), a three-judge Bench of this Court 
succinctly articulated the purport of an exclusive jurisdiction clause 
in any contract in the following words:
32. For answer to the above question, we have to see the 
effect of the jurisdiction clause in the agreement which 
provides that the agreement shall be subject to jurisdiction 
of the courts at Kolkata. It is a fact that whilst providing 
for jurisdiction clause in the agreement the words like 
16	
(1989) 2 SCC 163
88
Supreme Court Reports
“alone”, “only”, “exclusive” or “exclusive jurisdiction” have 
not been used but this, in our view, is not decisive and 
does not make any material difference. The intention of the 
parties—by having Clause 18 in the agreement—is clear 
and unambiguous that the courts at Kolkata shall have 
jurisdiction which means that the courts at Kolkata alone 
shall have jurisdiction. It is so because for construction of 
jurisdiction clause, like Clause 18 in the agreement, the 
maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius comes into 
play as there is nothing to indicate to the contrary. This 
legal maxim means that expression of one is the exclusion 
of another. By making a provision that the agreement is 
subject to the jurisdiction of the courts at Kolkata, the parties 
have impliedly excluded the jurisdiction of other courts. 
Where the contract specifies the jurisdiction of the courts 
at a particular place and such courts have jurisdiction to 
deal with the matter, we think that an inference may be 
drawn that parties intended to exclude all other courts. A 
clause like this is not hit by Section 23 of the Contract 
Act at all. Such clause is neither forbidden by law nor it 
is against the public policy. It does not offend Section 28 
of the Contract Act in any manner.
(emphasis supplied)
16.	 There are multiple other decisions of this Court upholding similar 
exclusive jurisdiction clauses. The decisions in Patel Roadways Ltd. 
v. Prasad Trading Co.,17 Angile Insulations v. Davy Ashmore India 
Ltd.,18 New Moga Transport Co. v. United India Insurance Co. 
Ltd.,19 Shree Subhlaxmi Fabrics (P) Ltd. v. Chand Mal Baradia,20 
Rajasthan SEB v. Universal Petrol Chemicals Ltd.21 and A.V.M. 
Sales Corpn. v. Anuradha Chemicals (P) Ltd.22 are some of them 
providing ample guidance in this behalf. 
17	
(1991) 4 SCC 270
18	
(1995) 4 SCC 153
19	
(2004) 4 SCC 677 
20	
(2005) 10 SCC 704
21	
(2009) 3 SCC 107
22	
(2012) 2 SCC 315
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
89
Rakesh Kumar Verma v. HDFC Bank Ltd. 
17.	 The issue as to how an exclusive jurisdiction clause has to be read 
and understood is, thus, no longer res-integra. 
18.	 A bare perusal of the above decisions leads to the conclusion that 
for an exclusive jurisdiction clause to be valid, it should be (a) in 
consonance with Section 28 of the Contract Act, i.e., it should not 
absolutely restrict any party from initiating legal proceedings pertaining 
to the contract, (b) the Court that has been given exclusive jurisdiction 
must be competent to have such jurisdiction in the first place, i.e., a 
Court not having jurisdiction as per the statutory regime cannot be 
bestowed jurisdiction by means of a contract and, finally, (c) the parties 
must either impliedly or explicitly confer jurisdiction on a specific set 
of courts. These three limbs/criteria have to be mandatorily fulfilled.
19.	 Swastik Gases (P) Ltd. (supra) is wholly applicable to the facts at 
hand, and being a larger Bench decision, binds us. 
20.	 However, in none of the precedents of this Court, noticed above, did 
an service/employment contract fell for consideration. According to 
Mr. Deshmukh and Mr. Chaturvedi, learned counsel for Rakesh and 
Deepti, respectively, the decision in Vishal Gupta (supra) correctly 
explains the legal position vis-à-vis service/employment contracts 
and, therefore, this Court may consider accepting the forward-looking 
posture and practical view expressed by the learned Judge. It has 
been contended that in an unequal battle between the mighty lion 
(employer) and the timid rabbit (employee), where the dice is heavily 
loaded from the inception against the employee, no further embargo 
ought to be placed in his/her pursuit for justice by pinning him/her 
down to the courts in the city (Mumbai) mentioned in the appointment 
letter/employment agreement. 
21.	 At this stage, it would be appropriate to glance through a legal 
position having a bearing on these appeals. There is a gulf of 
difference between a public service and a service contract with a 
private employer. The origin of government service is contractual. 
There is an offer and acceptance in every case. But once appointed 
to his post or office, the government servant acquires a status and 
his rights and obligations are no longer determined by the consent 
of both the parties, but by the statute or statutory rules as framed. 
In other words, the legal position of a government servant is more 
one of status than that of contract. A government servant may not 
be tied down by his employer to a court at a particular place, should 
90
Supreme Court Reports
a dispute arise for adjudication by a law court. Articles 14, 16 and 
21 could stand in the way. On the other hand, service in the private 
sector is governed by the terms of the employment contract entered 
into by and between the parties inter-se. Like any other contract, even 
in an employment contract, a concluded contract pre-supposes the 
existence of at least two parties with mutual rights and obligations. 
Once a concluded contract comes into existence, it is axiomatic that 
such rights and obligations of the parties are governed by the terms 
and conditions thereof. Since there is a prior meeting of minds of 
the contracting parties, their intentions have to be gathered from 
the contract (appointment letter/employment agreement, here) and 
looking at the same, it can safely be inferred that the contracting 
parties were ad idem on the terms of the appointment letter/
employment agreement which specified courts in Mumbai exclusively 
as the situs of dispute resolution. 
22.	 Nowadays, the private sector employs individuals pan-India for 
providing services to reach people in the last mile. Therefore, it may 
not be possible for all employers in the private sector to contest suits 
at far-off places from the registered office. This seems to be the 
overwhelming reason why exclusion clauses are inserted. Rakesh and 
Deepti having accepted the terms and conditions of the appointment 
letter/employment agreement and acted upon its terms by joining 
their respective posts, they could not have possibly avoided the 
contract on a second thought that a term contained therein may not 
be beneficial for them at a subsequent stage.
23.	 As long as an employment contract does not offend the provisions 
of any applicable legislation, such as the Contract Act or the CPC, 
ordinarily, there should be no reason to interfere. It cannot but be 
gainsaid that the scope of interference, in such matters, is quite 
narrow.
24.	 The contention on behalf of Rakesh and Deepti that the decisions 
referred to above would not be applicable in the case of a service 
contract has not really impressed us. A contract – be it commercial, 
insurance, sales, service, etc. – is after all a contract. It is a legally 
binding agreement, regardless of the parties involved or their inter 
se strengths. To make a distinction for employment contracts on 
the specious ground that a mighty lion and a timid rabbit are the 
contracting parties would violate the principle of equality, in the sense 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
91
Rakesh Kumar Verma v. HDFC Bank Ltd. 
that rights and liabilities would not be dependent on the parties’ status, 
power or influence. Contracts should be treated equally, without bias 
or distinction. The fact that one party is more powerful or influential 
(the mighty lion) and the other more vulnerable (the timid rabbit) 
does not justify making exceptions or distinctions in the application 
of contractual principles.
25.	 We may also emphasize that unequal bargaining power is not unique 
to contracts of personal service. In many areas, such as business, 
commerce, or real estate, contracts may involve parties with dissimilar 
levels of strength, resources or negotiating power. As and by way of 
illustration, we can cite instances where big builders sub-contract a 
part of the development work entrusted to them to sub-contractors. 
Such contracts too involve the mighty lion and, though not a timid 
rabbit, but a weak lamb. Based on the status of the parties, the latter 
cannot escape from the consequences if the former seeks to enforce 
a condition in the contract which the latter perceives is oppressive 
or the latter, refusing to perform any of its obligations considering it 
as onerous faces a law suit for breach of contract. 
26.	 Law treats all contracts with equal respect and unless a contract 
is proved to suffer from any of the vitiating factors, the terms and 
conditions have to be enforced regardless of the relative strengths 
and weakness of the parties.
27.	 Thus, we are unable to approve the law laid down in Vishal Gupta 
(supra). 
28.	 Upon a perusal of the service contract and the exclusive jurisdiction 
clause under consideration in the instant appeals, we are convinced 
that the Patna High Court has offered a sound legal opinion with 
reference to the facts at hand while the Delhi High Court has erred 
in dismissing the civil revisional application placing entire reliance 
on the decision in Vishal Gupta (supra). All the three applicable 
mandatory criteria to hold that the clause is valid have been fulfilled 
in the instant appeals. We propose to assign brief reasons for each 
of the applicable limbs. 
29.	 First, Section 28 of the Contract Act does not bar exclusive jurisdiction 
clauses. What has been barred is the absolute restriction of any party 
from approaching a legal forum. The right to legal adjudication cannot 
be taken away from any party through contract but can be relegated 
92
Supreme Court Reports
to a set of Courts for the ease of the parties. In the present dispute, 
the clause does not take away the right of the employee to pursue 
a legal claim but only restricts the employee to pursue those claims 
before the courts in Mumbai alone. 
30.	 Secondly, the Court must already have jurisdiction to entertain such 
a legal claim. This limb pertains to the fact that a contract cannot 
confer jurisdiction on a court that did not have such a jurisdiction in 
the first place. The explanation to Section 20 of the CPC is essential 
to decide this issue. In the instant case, considering that the decision 
to employ Rakesh and Deepti were taken in Mumbai, the appointment 
letter in favour of Rakesh was issued from Mumbai, the employment 
agreement was dispatched from Mumbai, the decision to terminate 
the services of Rakesh and Deepti were taken in Mumbai and the 
letters of termination were dispatched from Mumbai, we are convinced 
that the courts in Mumbai do have jurisdiction. 
31.	 Lastly, the clause in the contract has clearly and explicitly barred 
the jurisdiction of all other courts by using the word “exclusive”. 
A profitable reference may be made to the extract of ABC Laminart 
(supra) reproduced above.
Relief 
32.	 HDFC Bank is, thus, justified in its claim that the suits ought to have 
been instituted in an appropriate court in Mumbai.
33.	 We hasten to observe that the Patna High Court, while correctly 
holding in favour of HDFC Bank on the point of law, has committed 
a fundamental error. It has allowed the application of HDFC Bank 
under Order VII, Rule 11 of the CPC meaning thereby the plaint 
stands rejected. Since the courts in Mumbai have the jurisdiction to 
decide the dispute raised by Rakesh and his plaint is not otherwise 
liable to rejection on attraction of any of the clauses of Rule 11, the 
proper course for the Patna High Court would have been to direct 
return of the plaint by the trial court under Order VII, Rule 10 of the 
CPC to Rakesh for its presentation before the competent court in 
Mumbai. While directing the trial court to return the plaint to Rakesh 
and to make the necessary endorsement in terms of sub-rule (2) 
of Rule 10, we grant him the liberty to present such plaint in the 
competent court in Mumbai.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
93
Rakesh Kumar Verma v. HDFC Bank Ltd. 
34.	 If Rakesh wishes to institute a fresh suit in a competent court in 
Mumbai, in such a case he need not take back the plaint but may 
have the suit instituted by him withdrawn.
35.	 Insofar as the suit instituted by Deepti too is concerned, the plaint 
has to be returned to her for presentation in a court in Mumbai. In 
the alternative, she may have her pending suit withdrawn and file a 
fresh suit in a competent court in Mumbai.
36.	 We have also noticed from the pleadings and prayers made in the 
respective plaints by Rakesh and Deepti that the same are defective. 
We grant them liberty to seek amendment of their respective plaints. 
If applications in this behalf are made, the trial courts may, in their 
discretion, allow the prayers therein. If fresh suits are instituted, this 
liberty would cease to operate.
37.	 If fresh suits are instituted, Rakesh and Deepti may plead in their 
plaints the grounds on which exemption from the law of limitation is 
claimed in terms of Order VII, Rule 6 of the CPC.
Conclusion
38.	 The impugned judgment and order of the Patna High Court is affirmed 
to the extent mentioned above and the lead appeal is dismissed. 
The connected appeal, however, stands allowed and the impugned 
judgment and order of the Delhi High Court is set aside. 
39.	 We clarify that the merits of the disputes have not been examined 
and all points are left open. 
40.	 No order as to costs. 
Result of the Case: Matters disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain