[2025] 5 S.C.R. 653 : 2025 INSC 623
Kabir Paharia 
v. 
National Medical Commission and Others
(Civil Appeal No. 5836 of 2025)
02 May 2025
[Vikram Nath and Sandeep Mehta,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the denial of admission to the appellant in the MBBS UG 
course under Scheduled Castes PwBD quota was grossly illegal, 
arbitrary and violative of the appellant’s fundamental rights as 
guaranteed u/Arts.14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Headnotes†
Education – Admission – MBBS UG course – Person with 
benchmark disabilities – The appellant being a person with 
benchmark disabilities (PwBD) belongs to the reserved 
category of Scheduled Caste was denied admission to the 
MBBS UG course despite standing high in merit in his category 
owing to his disability – Writ Petition – The High Court relying 
on the report submitted by the Medical Board concluded that 
the appellant was ineligible to pursue the medical courses – 
Correctness:
Held: This Court directed to constitute a fresh Medical Board – 
Appellant was subjected to extensive review assessment by the 
Medical Board – The report of the Board makes it amply clear that 
the appellant successfully demonstrated skilled techniques in the 
simulation laboratory including chest compressions, intravenous 
cannulation, assembly of a laryngoscope, intubation and suturing – 
The Medical Board, in its report, observed that the appellant 
demonstrated the functional adaptation using his existing digits 
during these tasks – The only minor challenge, which the appellant 
faced during the entire procedure, was putting on the sterilized 
standard gloves – This trivial aberration cannot be a ground to 
deny admission to the appellant in the MBBS UG course – The 
denial of admission to the appellant in the MBBS UG course was 
* Author
654
Supreme Court Reports
grossly illegal, arbitrary and violative of the appellant’s fundamental 
rights as guaranteed u/Arts.14 and 16 of the Constitution of India – 
The constitutional mandate of substantive equality demands that 
person with disabilities (PwD) and PwBD be afforded reasonable 
accommodations rather than subjected to exclusionary practices 
based on unfounded presumptions about their capabilities – Thus, 
the appellant to be allocated a seat in the MBBS UG course 2025 
against the Scheduled Castes PwBD quota in the AIIMS, New 
Delhi – The impugned order of the High Court is set aside – Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 – Constitution of India – 
Arts.14 and 16. [Paras 6, 7, 9, 12, 17]
Education – Admission – MBBS UG course – Person with 
benchmark disabilities – Process of revising guidelines – 
Directions issued:
Held: National Medical Commission directed to forthwith and not 
later than within a period of two months and at any cost before 
the counselling for the 2025-2026 session commence, complete 
the process of revising the guidelines in light of judgments of this 
Court in Om Rathod v. Director General of Health Sciences and 
Anmol v. Union of India & Ors. [Para 14]
Constitution of India – Arts.14 and 16 – Person with disabilities 
and Person with benchmark disabilities – Meaningful 
participation – Reasonable accommodation is not a matter 
of charity but a fundamental right:
Held: The constitutional promise of equality is not merely formal 
but substantive, requiring the State to take affirmative measures 
to ensure that PwD and PwBD can meaningfully participate in 
all spheres of life, including professional education – This Court 
emphasizes that reasonable accommodation is not a matter of 
charity but a fundamental right flowing from Arts.14, 16, and 21 
of Constitution – When administrative authorities create arbitrary 
barriers that exclude qualified PwBD candidates, they not only 
violate statutory provisions but also perpetuate the historical 
injustice and stigmatisation – The fundamental rights and the dignity 
of PwD and PwBD candidates must be protected by ensuring that 
assessment of their capabilities is individualised, evidence-based, 
and free from stereotypical assumptions that have no scientific 
foundation. [Para 15]
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
655
Kabir Paharia v. National Medical Commission and Others
Case Law Cited
Om Rathod v. Director General of Health Sciences [2024] 10 SCR 
2187 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 4283; Anmol v. Union of India & 
Ors., 2025 SCC OnLine SC 387 – referred to.
List of Acts
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016; Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Education; Admission; MBBS UG course; Person with benchmark 
disabilities; Fundamental Rights; Article 14 of Constitution; Article 
16 of Constitution; Article 21 of Constitution; Equality; Reasonable 
accommodation; Exclusionary practices; Stereotypical assumptions. 
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 5836 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 12.11.2024 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in LPA No. 967 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Gaurav Agarwal, Sr. Adv., Talha Abdul Rahman, Rahul Bajaj, Taha 
Bin Tasneem, Amar Jain, M Shaz Khan.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Ms. Archana Pathak Dave, A.S.G., Piyush Beriwal, Sudarshan 
Lamba, Praneet Pranav, Aaditya Dixit, Aditya Manubarwala, Prateek 
Bhatia, Dhawal Mohan, Paranjay Tripathi, Rajesh Raj.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
Mehta, J.
1.	
Heard.
2.	
Leave granted.
3.	
The appellant being a person with benchmark disabilities (for short 
‘PwBD’) belongs to the reserved category of Scheduled Caste and 
656
Supreme Court Reports
aspires for admission to the MBBS UG (Bachelor of Medicine and 
Bachelor of Surgery) course. Having been denied admission to the 
MBBS course, despite standing high in merit in his category i.e., 
Scheduled Castes-PwBD quota, the appellant approached the High 
Court of Delhi at New Delhi1 by filing a Writ Petition (C) No. 12165 
of 2024, which came to be rejected vide order dated 10th September, 
2024. The Letters Patent Appeal No. 967 of 2024, preferred by the 
appellant, also stands rejected by the Division Bench of the High 
Court vide order dated 12th November, 2024, which is assailed in 
this appeal by special leave.
4.	
The facts in brief, essential for disposal of the present matter, can 
be gathered from the detailed order dated 2nd April, 2025 passed by 
this Court, which is reproduced hereinbelow: -
“2. The petitioner passed Secondary School Examination/
Class Xth in 2022 with 91.5% marks and class XIIth 
exams with 90% marks. He appeared for the National 
Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test (for short “NEET”) UG 2024 
Examinations in the category of SC/PwBD candidate. 
The deformities suffered by the petitioner in his body are 
as below:-
“congenital absence of multiple fingers in both hands 
as well as involvement of left foot (2nd and 3rd toe), 
the extent whereof has been assessed at 42%.”
3. Despite the structural disadvantages referred to 
above, the petitioner performed exceedingly well in the 
examination scoring 542 marks and secured a category 
rank of 176. It may be stated that the cut-off marks for 
these subcategories were 143-127. Having made the 
cut-off for the SC/PwBD category with flying colours, 
the petitioner staked his rightful claim for the next stage 
which requires the issuance of a Certificate of Disability 
for NEET Admissions (“NEET Disability Certificate”) by a 
designated ‘Disability Certification Centre’. Accordingly, 
the petitioner approached the Vardhman Mahavir Medical 
1	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘High Court.’
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
657
Kabir Paharia v. National Medical Commission and Others
College-Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi (for short “VMMC-
SJ Hospital”) for medical assessment. Even though, the 
VMMC-SJ Hospital assessed the petitioner’s disability at 
68%, it concluded that under the NMC/MCI guidelines, 
the petitioner was not entitled to pursue the medical 
courses. The conclusions drawn by the certifying body 
in the certificate dated 19th August, 2024, are reproduced 
below for ready reference:-
“Conclusion: Based on quantification of disability 
The candidate is not eligible to pursue medical 
courses (as per NMC norms).
Remark: BILATERAL UPEER (sic) LIMB 
INVOLVEMENT
The Disability Certification Board certifies that 
the candidate is not eligible for admission in 
Medical/Dental courses and to avail 5% PwD 
reservation as per the NMC/MCI Gazette 
Notification.”
4. Aggrieved by his disqualification from admission in the 
MBBS course on the ground of benchmark disabilities, 
despite standing high in merit, the petitioner approached 
the High Court of Delhi by filing Writ Petition (Civil) No. 
12165 of 2024.
5. The learned Single Bench of the High Court directed 
the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 
to constitute a Board of three experts to reassess the 
petitioner’s disabilities and to give an opinion as to whether 
the petitioner would be able to pursue medical courses 
and perform as a Doctor. In compliance, the petitioner 
was subjected to reassessment by the Medical Board 
constituted at AIIMS, New Delhi and the report was 
submitted to the learned Single Judge, who upon perusal 
thereof, concluded that the petitioner was ineligible to 
pursue medical courses. Accordingly, the writ petition was 
dismissed vide order dated 10th September, 2024.
6. The petitioner assailed the decision of the learned Single 
Judge by filing Letters Patent Appeal No. 967 of 2024. 
658
Supreme Court Reports
The Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi passed 
an order dated 27th September, 2024, and directed a 
fresh evaluation of the petitioner’s disabilities by a newly 
constituted medical Board. The three-member medical 
Board constituted at the AIIMS reiterated the conclusions 
of the earlier Medical Board and again declared the 
petitioner ineligible to pursue the medical courses as per 
the prevailing NMC norms. Upon receiving the report, 
the learned Division Bench of the Delhi High Court vide 
impugned judgment dated 12th November, 2024, endorsed 
the view of the board and dismissed the Letters Patent 
Appeal preferred by the petitioner. The said judgment is 
subject matter of challenge in this petition.
7. Mr. Rahul Bajaj, learned counsel representing the 
petitioner, contended that the impugned judgment and 
the decisions of both the medical Boards are inherently 
flawed inasmuch as neither the medical authorities nor 
the High Court duly adverted to the crucial concepts of 
assistive devices and reasonable accommodation to which 
the petitioner is entitled, under the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act, 2016 (for short ‘Act of 2016’). The vital 
factors, i.e., the academic excellence of the petitioner, his 
performance in the NEET examination, the high placement 
in merit, were totally glossed over while denying relief to 
the petitioner. Shri Bajaj relied upon the judgments of 
this Court in Om Rathod v. Director General of Health 
Sciences, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 4283 and Anmol v. 
Union of India & Ors. 2025 SCC OnLine SC 387, to 
urge that the salutary principles provided under Article 
41 of the Constitution of India read with the Act of 2016 
clearly entitle the petitioner to seek medical education as 
both these judgments expressly recognize the concepts 
of assistive devices and reasonable accommodation. By 
availing these moderations as provided under the decisions 
of this Court, the petitioner would be well equipped to 
perform his duties as a Doctor.
8. Learned counsel submitted that in the case of  
Om Rathod (supra), despite the fact that the candidate 
was not having both hands, he was held entitled to undergo 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
659
Kabir Paharia v. National Medical Commission and Others
the MBBS course pursuant to an assessment made by 
Dr. Satendra Singh, a specialist in the field.
9. Learned counsel submitted that Dr. Satendra Singh, while 
undertaking the functional assessment of the candidate 
Shri Om Rathod posed four questions for assessing his 
ability to undergo MBBS course and concluded that all the 
questions had to be answered in negative. The relevant 
excerpt from Om Rathod’s judgment is quoted below: -
“11. Dr Satendra Singh submitted his report 
on 20 October 2024. This Court duly furnished 
the report to the second respondent, National 
Medical Council, on 21 October 2024 to enable 
them to formulate their response. The report 
by Dr Satendra Singh outlined the functional 
disability of the appellant to be an inability to 
stand independently which may prove limiting in 
clinical rotations in surgical settings. The report 
suggested solutions to enable the appellant in 
such cases. The report further suggested clinical 
accommodations for the appellant to reduce 
the barriers he may encounter. The report 
determined the accommodations necessary for 
the appellant to be reasonable and in compliance 
with existing norms. The report formulated four 
questions and answered them as follows:
“a) Would the proposed accommodation result 
in a failure to meet the NMC CBME’s inherent 
requirements? Not in my opinion
b) Would the accommodation legitimately 
jeopardize patient safety? Not in my opinion
c) Would the proposed accommodation result 
in the improper waiver of a core requirement of 
the CBME? Not in my opinion
d) Would the proposed accommodation pose an 
undue hardship on the medical college (budgets 
wise)? Not in my opinion”
660
Supreme Court Reports
10. In his report, Dr. Satendra Singh quoted that the father 
of Neurosurgery Harvey Cushing emphasized way back 
in 1912 that motor skills are often the least important part 
of the work.
11. Learned counsel submitted that the petitioner in the 
case of Anmol (supra) was suffering from locomotor 
disability assessed at 50% with club foot right lower limb 
and Phocomelia (a congenital defect which causes severe 
limb shortening or loss of long bones), in left middle ring 
finger through middle phalanx with right middle index finger 
through middle phalanx. The candidate also suffered from 
speech and language disability assessed at 20%.
12. Mr. Bajaj contended that the petitioner herein is 
having much better physical/locomotor attributes and is 
well equipped as compared to the two candidates in the 
cases of Anmol (supra) and Om Rathod (supra). He also 
scored much higher marks than these candidates in NEET 
(UG) examination 2024-2025. Anmol had obtained rank 
2462 in the PwD category, whereas the petitioner herein 
secured 176 rank and thus, he is much better placed than 
the candidates in the above-referred cases.
13. He submitted that the assessment made by the medical 
Board of the petitioner’s capability to take the medical 
degree course and his disqualification on the anvil of NMC 
norms is illegal and unsustainable in view of the law laid 
down by this Court in the judgments referred to supra.
14. He, therefore, urged that a direction deserves to be 
issued to have a reassessment done of the petitioner 
through Dr. Satyendra Singh on the ratio of the above 
referred judgments and to mandate the respondents to 
grant admission and accommodate the petitioner in the 
MBBS (UG) Course 2024-2025.
15. Relying upon the order dated 17th April, 2023, passed 
in the case of Vibhushita Sharma v. Union of India, Writ 
Petition (Civil) No.793 of 2022, learned counsel submitted 
that in case, this Court is not inclined to grant admission 
to the petitioner in the 2024-2025 MBBS Degree course, a 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
661
Kabir Paharia v. National Medical Commission and Others
suitable direction deserves to be issued to the respondents 
to admit the petitioner in the academic session 2025-2026 
treating him to be NEET (UG) qualified.
16. Per contra, learned counsel representing the Union 
of India and National Medical Commission urged that the 
Commission is under the process of revising its guidelines 
in compliance with the judgments in the cases of Om 
Rathod (supra) and Anmol (supra). Three meetings have 
already taken place, and the process is expected to be 
finalised before counselling for the next academic session 
commences. They thus, urged that the petitioner will not 
be prejudiced, if the consideration of this matter is deferred 
till the new guidelines are put in place. 
17. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the 
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the 
material placed on record.
18. Prima facie, we find substance in the submission of 
the learned counsel representing the respondents that the 
process for revising the guidelines in terms of this Court’s 
decisions (supra) is underway and a final outcome is 
expected before the counselling session for MBBS (UG) 
2025-2026 commences. However, we are not inclined to 
defer the proceedings at this stage.
19. Denying relief to the petitioner on this premise would 
be totally unjustified in view of the ratio of this Court’s 
judgments in Om Rathod (supra) and Anmol (supra). 
Merely because the NMC is under the process of revising 
the guidelines, the petitioner’s fate cannot be allowed to 
hang in a limbo in spite of the fact that he has performed 
exceedingly well in the NEET (UG) 2024 examination and 
stood high in the merit in his category. 
20. In view of the above, we hereby direct that a fresh 
Medical Board shall be constituted at the All-India Institute 
of Medical Sciences, New Delhi comprising of five Doctors/
specialists. One of the Board members shall be a specialist 
in locomotor disabilities and one member shall be a Neuro-
Physician.
662
Supreme Court Reports
21. The petitioner shall be intimated a suitable date for 
assessment by the Board within the next seven days. 
He shall appear before the Board on the appointed date 
whereupon the Board shall undertake a fresh assessment 
of the petitioner’s disabilities with due deference to the 
ratio of this Court’s judgments in Om Rathod (supra) and 
Anmol (supra). The Board’s report shall be forwarded to 
this Court in a sealed cover on or before 15th April, 2025.”
5.	
Pursuant to the aforesaid direction, the appellant was subjected to 
extensive review assessment by a Medical Board constituted at the 
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi (for short ‘AIIMS, 
New Delhi’). The report dated 24th April, 2025 has been forwarded 
by the Medical Board, which is reproduced hereinbelow for the sake 
of convenience: -
“Subject: Report of the medical board constituted at AIIMS 
for medical examination of petitioner Sh. Kabir Paharia in 
compliance of order dated 02.04.2025, Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India, New Delhi (Section-XIV)vide Special Leave 
Petition (Civil) No. 29275 of 2024 titled Kabir Paharia 
Versus National Medical Commission & Others.
*****************************
With reference to the aforementioned subject, the Medical 
Superintendent, AIIMS, New Delhi constituted a Medical 
Board consisting of the following members:-
1. Dr. S.L. Yadav 
Professor, Deptt. of P.M.R
- 
Chairperson
2. Dr. Suman Jain  
Professor, Deptt. of Physiology
- 
Member
3. Dr. Divya M.R.  
Assoc. Professor, Deptt. of Neurology
- 
Member
4. Dr. Arun Kumar Choudhary 
Asstt. Professor, Deptt. of PMR
- 
Member
5. Dr. Sahil Batra 
Asstt. Professor, Deptt. of Orthopaedics
- 
Member
6. Dr. Veeranna B. 
Department of Hospital Administration
- 
Member Secy.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
663
Kabir Paharia v. National Medical Commission and Others
The meeting of the Medical Board was held on 16.04.2024 
(Wednesday) at 11:00 A.M. in the Seminar Room, Room 
No. 01, Ground floor, PMR OPD, Department of PMR, 
AIIMS, New Delhi. The available reports, earlier disability 
certificates and medical documents were reviewed. The 
petitioner Sh. Kabir Paharia was present and was examined 
by the members of the Medical Board. The second board 
meeting was held on 22nd April 2025 at 11:00 AM in the 
SET facility convergence block, AIIMS, New Delhi.
Mr. Kabir Paharia underwent a comprehensive neurological 
examination as part of the Medical Board assessment. It 
was observed that Mr. Kabir has a significant absence of 
multiple digits in both hands (specifically, the index and 
middle fingers on the right hand, and the index, middle, 
and ring fingers on the left hand) as well as in the left foot 
(notably, the second and third toes), which is attributed to a 
birth complication as documented in the available medical 
records. His condition is deemed non-progressive, and 
the locomotor disability is classified as permanent. The 
neurological examination showed normal strength in the 
existing limbs and digits, with intact sensations and good 
coordination of the existing limbs and digits.
He was asked to demonstrate various skilled techniques 
in the simulation laboratory, including chest compressions, 
intravenous cannulation, assembly of a laryngoscope, 
intubation, and suturing, all of which he executed 
satisfactorily. He demonstrated functional adaptation using 
his existing digits during these tasks. However, the board 
observed that he faced minor challenges while attempting 
to put on the sterilized standard gloves. He had slight 
coordination problems and delays caused by the lack of 
fingers and empty finger slots in the gloves. An evaluation 
by an occupational therapist validated his independence 
in activities of daily living (ADLs).”
6.	
A careful perusal of the above report makes it amply clear that 
the appellant successfully demonstrated skilled techniques in the 
simulation laboratory including chest compressions, intravenous 
cannulation, assembly of a laryngoscope, intubation and suturing. The 
664
Supreme Court Reports
Medical Board, in its report, observed that the appellant demonstrated 
the functional adaptation using his existing digits during these tasks. 
The only minor challenge, which the appellant faced during the entire 
procedure, was putting on the sterilized standard gloves.
7.	
We feel that the mindset must change and this trivial aberration, by 
no stretch of imagination, can be a ground to deny admission to the 
appellant in the MBBS UG course, when he is otherwise qualified 
and scored exceeding high rank in the NEET-UG 2024.
8.	
As per the result of NEET-UG 2024, the appellant secured an All-India 
Rank of 147946. His Scheduled Caste category rank was 7252, and 
his PwBD category rank was 176. The appellant has also submitted 
details of the provisional NEET-UG 2024 counselling seat allotment 
(Round 1), according to which a candidate with Roll No. 14491, who 
ranked 159816, was allocated a seat at AIIMS, New Delhi under the 
Scheduled Castes PwBD category. Apparently thus, a candidate who 
stood much below the appellant in merit has been admitted against 
the reserved seat at the AIIMS, New Delhi to which the appellant 
had a valid claim.
9.	
Manifestly, in view of the observations made by us in the order 
dated 2nd April, 2025 and the consequent successful assessment of 
the appellant by the Medical Board, AIIMS, New Delhi vide report 
dated 24th April, 2025, the denial of admission to the appellant in 
the MBBS UG course was grossly illegal, arbitrary and violative of 
the appellant’s fundamental rights as guaranteed under Articles 14 
and 16 of the Constitution of India. Such action not only reflects 
institutional bias and systemic discrimination but also undermines the 
principles of equal opportunity and non-discrimination enshrined in our 
constitutional framework. The constitutional mandate of substantive 
equality demands that person with disabilities (for short ‘PwD’) and 
PwBD be afforded reasonable accommodations rather than subjected 
to exclusionary practices based on unfounded presumptions about 
their capabilities.
10.	 On the previous date of hearing, we had sought a response from 
the learned counsel representing the respondents regarding the 
appellant’s submission that the candidate who secured a rank lower 
than the appellant had been granted admission against the Scheduled 
Castes PwBD quota in the MBBS UG course at AIIMS, New Delhi, 
for the academic year 2024–2025.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
665
Kabir Paharia v. National Medical Commission and Others
11.	 Today, during the course of hearing, Ms. Archana Pathak Dave, 
learned ASG, on instructions, fairly affirms this assertion of the 
appellant. She further states that as the appellant has been 
successfully assessed by the Medical Board constituted at AIIMS, 
New Delhi, he can be afforded admission in MBBS UG course against 
the Scheduled Castes PwBD quota in the AIIMS, New Delhi in the 
forthcoming counselling session of 2025-2026.
12.	 Taking consideration of the fact that the 2024-2025 academic 
session must have progressed significantly and thus it would not be 
expedient to grant admission to the appellant in the said session. 
We accordingly direct that the appellant shall be allocated a seat in 
the MBBS UG course 2025 against the Scheduled Castes PwBD 
quota in the All-India Institute of Medical Science, New Delhi, in the 
forthcoming academic session.
13.	 In backdrop of the factual matrix narrated supra and the comparative 
higher merit secured by the appellant in the NEET-UG 2024 
examination, we make it clear that the appellant shall not be required 
to undergo the NEET-UG 2025 examination.
14.	 We further direct that the National Medical Commission shall forthwith 
and not later than within a period of two months from today and at 
any cost before the counselling for the 2025-2026 session commence, 
complete the process of revising the guidelines in light of judgments 
of this Court in Om Rathod v. Director General of Health Sciences2 
and Anmol v. Union of India & Ors.3 so that no deserving candidate 
in the PwBD category is denied admission into the MBBS course in 
spite of his/her/their entitlement. It must be ensured that systemic 
discrimination against persons with benchmark disabilities, whether 
direct or indirect, is eliminated and that the admission process upholds 
their right to equal opportunity and dignity.
15.	 The constitutional promise of equality is not merely formal but 
substantive, requiring the State to take affirmative measures to ensure 
that PwD and PwBD can meaningfully participate in all spheres of 
life, including professional education. We emphasize that reasonable 
accommodation is not a matter of charity but a fundamental right 
flowing from Articles 14, 16, and 21 of our Constitution. When 
2	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 4283.
3	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 387.
666
Supreme Court Reports
administrative authorities create arbitrary barriers that exclude 
qualified PwBD candidates, they not only violate statutory provisions 
but also perpetuate the historical injustice and stigmatisation. The 
fundamental rights and the dignity of PwD and PwBD candidates 
must be protected by ensuring that assessment of their capabilities 
is individualised, evidence-based, and free from stereotypical 
assumptions that have no scientific foundation.
16.	 Before parting, we express our wholehearted appreciation for 
Mr. Rahul Bajaj and Mr. Amar Jain, learned counsel, both persons 
with benchmark disability (zero vision), for the excellent assistance 
provided by them during the course of hearing of the present matter. 
We also express our sincere appreciation to Mr. Gaurav Agarwal, 
learned senior counsel, for his pro bono services and Ms. Archana 
Pathak Dave, learned ASG, for her pragmatic approach in the matter. 
17.	 The impugned order dated 12th November, 2024, passed by the High 
Court of Delhi in Letters Patent Appeal No. 967 of 2024 is set aside. 
18.	 Consequently, the present appeal is allowed in these terms. No 
order as to costs.
19.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan