[2025] 3 S.C.R. 540 : 2025 INSC 329
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. 
v. 
V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc. 
(Civil Appeal Nos. 3640-3642 of 2025)
06 March 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala* and Pankaj Mithal, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the courts below committed any error in upholding the 
objections raised by the respondent nos. 1 and 2 herein against 
execution of the decree on the claim of being in possession of 
the suit property in their capacity as cultivating tenants; Whether 
the respondent nos. 1 and 2 are entitled to the protection of the 
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants’ Protection Act, 1955 and could 
the Executing Court have decided the question of validity of the 
decree on this ground. 
Headnotes†
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – s.47; Or. XXI, rr.97, 101 – Tamil 
Nadu Cultivating Tenants’ Protection Act, 1955 – Objection 
raised by Respondent nos.1 and 2 against execution of the 
decree claiming to be in possession of the suit property in 
their capacity as cultivating tenants, upheld by courts below – 
Respondent nos.1 and 2, if entitled to the protection of the 
1955 Act and whether the Executing Court could have decided 
the question of validity of the decree on this ground: 
Held: The decree in favour of the appellants granting specific 
performance with possession was affirmed by the High Court 
and the SLP against the order of the High Court also stood 
dismissed – Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 chose not to contest the 
original suit before the ASJ – They did not appear even before 
the High Court and Supreme Court in the appeals filed by the 
vendors (judgment debtors) – Further, the issues that ought to 
have been raised by the parties during the adjudication of the 
original suit cannot be determined by the executing court as 
such adjudication may undermine the decree itself – Respondent 
nos.1 and 2 could have filed a joint written statement stating that 
* Author
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
541
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
they are cultivating tenants at the stage of the original suit itself, 
but rather they raised the said issue in the form of objections at 
the stage of execution – Furthermore, respondent nos.1 and 2 
failed to produce any documentary evidence as regards their 
claim of being cultivating tenants, even at the stage of their s.47 
application – Present is a case of collusion between the vendors 
and the respondent nos.1 and 2 (nephews of the vendors), to 
deprive the appellants from availing the fruits of the decree in 
their favour – Even otherwise, the respondent nos.1 and 2 cannot 
claim protection of the special legislation of 1955 for the period 
during which they were not registered as tenants cultivating the 
suit properties – The certificate that they are in possession of the 
suit properties since 1974 does not establish any independent 
right of possession in their favour – Further, the certificate itself 
appears to have been obtained in collusion with the vendors who 
at the time of giving “no objection” had ceased to be the owners of 
the suit property – Respondent nos.1 and 2 are not the bona fide 
cultivating tenants of the suit property – Thus, there is no question 
of deciding the validity of the decree on the ground of being a 
nullity due to lack of jurisdiction of the civil court to evict cultivating 
tenants – The rejection by the High Court of the amendments to 
the execution petition filed by the appellants was erroneous, set 
aside – Impugned order and the order passed by the Executing 
Court, set aside. [Paras 60, 63-65, 68-71]
Directions by Supreme Court – Inordinate delay by the 
Executing Courts in deciding execution petitions:
Held: In view of the direction in Rahul S. Shah case requiring the 
execution proceedings to be completed within six months from 
the date of filing, High Courts across the country to call for the 
necessary information from their respective district judiciary as 
regards pendency of the execution petitions – High Courts to issue 
an administrative order or circular directing their respective district 
judiciary to ensure that the execution petitions pending in various 
courts shall be decided and disposed of within a period of six 
months without fail otherwise the concerned presiding officer would 
be answerable to the High Court on its administrative side – The 
data along with the figures of pendency and disposal thereafter 
collected by all the High Courts to be forwarded to the Registry 
of the Supreme Court with individual reports. [Paras 74, 75, 77]
542
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – s.47; Or.XXI rr.97, 101 – s.47 
vis-à-vis Or.XXI r.97 – Questions to be determined by the Court 
executing decree – Resistance or obstruction to possession 
of immovable property:
Held: If an application u/Or.XXI, r.97 is made, then its determination 
will be under r.101 – r.103 further provides that where any 
application has been adjudicated upon u/rr.98 or 100, the order 
made thereon shall have the same force and will be subject 
to the same conditions as to an appeal or otherwise as if it 
were a decree – U/s.47 all questions relating to the execution, 
discharge or satisfaction of the decree, have to be determined 
by the executing court whereas u/r. 101 all questions including 
question relating to right, title or interest in the property arising 
between the parties to the proceedings have to be determined 
by the executing court – s.47 is a general provision whereas 
Or.XXI, rr.97 and 101 deal with a specific situation – Moreover, 
s.47 deals with executions of all kinds of decrees whereas Or.XXI, 
rr.97 and 101 deal only with execution of decree for possession – 
Apart from that, earlier, i.e., prior to the amendment, every order 
falling u/s. 47 was appealable (as the terms ‘decree’ included the 
order u/s.47) whereas now only certain orders as provided for  
u/Or. XXI have been made appealable – In the present case, the 
application of the respondents No.1 and 2 u/s.47 was in substance 
an application for determination of their possessory rights under 
Or XXI, r.97. [Para 52 ]
Civil Procedure Code, 1908 – s.47 – Or.XXI, r.101 – Harmonious 
construction – Questions to be determined by the Court 
executing decree:
Held: A harmonious reading of s.47 with Or.XXI r.101 implies that 
questions relating to right, title or interest in a decretal property 
must be related to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the 
decree – Thus, only matters arising subsequent to the passing of 
the decree can be determined by an executing court u/s.47 and 
Or.XXI R.101. [Para 62]
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – Or. XXI, r.97 – Resistance or 
obstruction to possession of immovable property – Application 
u/Or. XXI, r.97 – Nature:
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
543
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
Held: An application u/Or. XXI, r.97 may be made in respect of 
obstruction raised by any person in obtaining possession of the 
decretal property– Courts adjudicating such application have to 
do so in accordance with r.101 and hold a full-fledged inquiry to 
determine all questions including questions relating to right, title 
or interest in the property arising between the parties. [Para 42]
Words and Phrases – Civil Procedure Code, 1908 – Or. XXI, 
rr.35, 97-101 – Decree for immovable property – Resistance 
or obstruction to possession of immovable property – “any 
person” – Interpretation of:
Held: In execution of decree for possession of immovable property, 
the executing court delivers actual physical possession of the 
decretal land to the decree holder – r.35 confers jurisdiction on 
the executing Court to remove any person, who is bound by the 
decree and who refuses to vacate the property – “any person who 
is bound by the decree”, clearly mandates that removal can only 
be of a person who is bound by the decree – Further, rr.97 to 101 
deal with situation when execution is obstructed or resisted by 
“any person” claiming right, title or interest in the property – The 
words “any person” include even a stranger to a decree resisting 
the decree of possession as not being bound by a decree or by 
claiming independent right, title or interest to the property – Thus, 
r.97 not only provides remedy to a decree holder in obtaining 
possession of an immovable property but also to a stranger who 
obstructs or resists delivery of possession of the property by claiming 
derivative title from the judgment debtor or independent right, title 
or interest in the decretal property – Whereas, r.99 gives right to 
a third party claiming right, title or interest in the property to seek 
restoration of the decretal property. [Paras 48, 49]
Case Law Cited
Silverline Forum Pvt. Ltd. v. Rajiv Trust and Anr. [1998] 2 SCR 
587 : (1998) 3 SCC 723; C.F. Angadi v. Y.S. Hirannayya [1972] 
2 SCR 515 : (1972) 1 SCC 191; Vasudev Dhanjibhai Modi v. 
Rajabhai Abdul Rehman [1971] 1 SCR 66 : (1970) 1 SCC 670; 
Rahul S. Shah v. Jinendra Kumar Gandhi [2021] 4 SCR 279 : 
(2021) 6 SCC 418 – relied on.
Shreenath & Anr. v. Rajesh & Ors. [1998] 2 SCR 709 : (1998) 4 
SCC 543; State of Bihar & Ors. v. Bihar Rajya Bhumi Vikas Bank 
544
Samiti [2018] 7 SCR 1147 : (2018) 9 SCC 472; Salem Advocate 
Bar Association v. Union of India [2005] Supp. 1 SCR 929 : (2005) 
6 SCC 344; Rajinder Kumar v. Kuldeep Singh [2014] 2 SCR 356 : 
(2014) 15 SCC 529; Topanmal Chhotamal v. Kundomal Gangaram, 
AIR 1960 SC 388; Smriti Debbarma v. Prabha Ranjan Debbarma 
[2023] 1 SCR 355; Sunder Dass v. Ram Prakash [1977] 3 SCR 
60 : (1977) 2 SCC 662; Brahmdeo Chaudhary v. Rishikesh Prasad 
Jaiswal [1997] 1 SCR 463 : (1997) 3 SCC 694; NSS Narayan 
Sarma & Ors. v. Goldstone Exports (P) Ltd. & Ors. [2001] Supp. 
5 SCR 327 : (2002) 1 SCC 662; Samir Singh and Anr. v. Abdul 
Rab [2014] 10 SCR 1004 : (2015) 1 SCC 379; Bhanwar Lal v. 
Satyanarain [1994] Supp. 4 SCR 208 : (1995) 1 SCC 6; Bhoj 
Raj Garg v. Goyal Education and Welfare Society & Ors., Special 
Leave Petition (C) Nos. 19654 of 2022 – referred to.
List of Acts
Civil Procedure Code, 1908; Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants’ 
Protection Act, 1955.
List of Keywords
Section 47 and Order XXI Rule 97-103 of Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908; Execution petition, Objections against execution of the 
decree; Discharge or satisfaction; Cultivating tenants; Decretal 
property; Executing court; Right of possession; Collusion; Lack 
of jurisdiction; Objection at the stage of execution; Execution 
proceedings; Agreement of sale; Amendment application; 
Possession of immovable property; Resistance or obstruction; 
Frustrate and defeat decree; Validity of decree; Revenue authorities; 
Dispossession; Transferee pendente lite; Right, title or interest in 
property; Independent right of possession; Judgment debtor; Notice 
of execution of the sale deed; Bona fide and genuine; Original 
vendors; Third party; “any person”; Stranger to a decree.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 3640-3642 
of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 18.12.2019 of the High 
Court of Judicature at Madras in CRPNPD No. 4311 of 2011 and 
CRPNPD Nos. 2150 and 2151 of 2015
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
545
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Senthil Jagadeesan, Sr. Adv., Punit Manoj Agarwwal, Ms. Mrinal 
Kanwar, Vaibhav.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Rahul Jain, Vishnu Shankar Jain.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.B. Pardiwala, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the 
following parts: -
INDEX*
A.
FACTUAL MATRIX ...........................................................
6
B.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELLANTS ..........................
22
C.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT NOS. 1 & 2 ....
25
D.
ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED ........................................
32
E.
ANALYSIS .........................................................................
33
(i)
Relevant statutory provisions .......................................
33
(ii)
Nature of application under Order XXI Rule 97 ..........
37
(iii)
Section 47 of the CPC vis-à-vis Order XXI Rule 97 of 
the CPC ............................................................................
51
F.
CONCLUSION ..................................................................
77
1.	
Leave granted. 
2.	
“The seeker of justice many a time has to take long circuitous 
routes, both on account of hierarchy of courts and the procedural 
law. Such persons are and can be dragged till the last ladder of the 
said hierarchy for receiving justice but even here he only breathes 
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.
546
fear of receiving the fruits of that justice for which he has been 
aspiring to receive. To reach this stage is in itself an achievement 
and satisfaction as he, by then has passed through a long arduous 
journey of the procedural law with many hurdles replica of mountain 
terrain with ridges and furrows. When he is ready to take the bite of 
that fruit, he has to pass through the same terrain of the procedural 
law in the execution proceedings, the morose is writ large on his face. 
What looked inevitable to him to receive it at his hands distance is 
deluded back into the horizon. The creation of the hierarchy of courts 
was for a reasonable objective for conferring greater satisfaction to 
the parties that errors, if any, by any of the lower courts under the 
scrutiny of a higher court be rectified and long procedural laws also 
with good intention to exclude and filter out all unwanted who may be 
the cause of obstruction to such seeker in his journey to justice. But 
this obviously is one of the causes of delay in justice. Of course, under 
this pattern the party wrongfully gaining within permissible limits also 
stretches the litigation as much as possible. Thus, this has been the 
cause of anxiety and concern of various authorities, legislators and 
courts. How to eliminate such a long consuming justice? We must 
confess that we have still to go a long way before true satisfaction 
in this regard is received. Even after one reaches the stage of final 
decree, he has to undergo a long distance by passing through the 
ordained procedure in the execution proceedings before he receives 
the bowl of justice.
The courts within their limitation have been interpreting the procedural 
laws so as to conclude all possible disputes pertaining to the 
decretal property, which is within its fold in an execution proceeding, 
i.e., including what may be raised later by way of another bout of 
litigations through a fresh suit. Similarly, legislatures equally are also 
endeavouring by amendments to achieve the same objective. The 
present case is one in this regard. Keeping this in view, we now 
proceed to examine the present case.
In interpreting any procedural law, where more than one interpretation 
is possible, the one which curtails the procedure without eluding 
justice is to be adopted. The procedural law is always subservient to 
and is in aid of justice. Any interpretation which eludes or frustrates 
the recipient of justice is not to be followed.” [Shreenath & Anr. v. 
Rajesh & Ors reported in (1998) 4 SCC 543]
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
547
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
3.	
We are tempted to preface our judgment with the above quoted 
observations of this Court made almost three decades back, as 
the situation remains the same even today. It is said that the woes 
for the litigants in this country start once they are able to obtain a 
decree in their favour and are unable to execute and reap its fruits 
for years together. 
4.	
These appeals arise from a common judgment and order passed 
by the High Court of Judicature at Madras dated 18.12.2019 in Civil 
Revision Petition (NPD) No. 4311 of 2011 (“first revision petition”) 
and Civil Revision Petition (NPD) No. 2151 of 2015 (“second revision 
petition”) filed by the appellants herein under Section 115 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (the “CPC”) by which the High Court 
rejected the revision petitions and thereby affirmed the orders passed 
by the Additional Subordinate Judge, Salem (“ASJ”) one allowing the 
application filed by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein, respectively, 
under Section 47 of the CPC and rejecting the application filed by 
the appellants herein seeking amendment in the execution petition.
A.	
FACTUAL MATRIX
5.	
One Ayyavoo Udayar, the father of the appellants herein entered 
into an agreement of sale dated 30.06.1980 with Ramanujan and 
Jagadeesan, the respondent nos. 3 and 4 herein (the “vendors”) 
respectively, whereby the respondents agreed to sell the property 
under dispute (the “suit property”) for Rs. 67,000/-. An earnest 
money of Rs. 10,000/- was paid by Ayyavoo Udayar while entering 
the agreement of sale. It was agreed between the parties that the 
balance of Rs. 57,000/- would be paid on or before 15.11.1980 upon 
receipt of which, the vendors would execute the sale deed.
6.	
On 15.11.1980, Ayyavoo Udayar issued a telegram to the vendors 
requesting that they should receive the balance consideration and 
execute the sale deed. The vendors sent a reply stating that they 
would execute the sale deed on 20.11.1980, however, no sale deed 
was executed even on the said date. Since the vendors did not 
come forward to execute the sale deed despite notice and talks of 
settlement, Ayyavoo Udayar was compelled to file the O.S. No. 514 
of 1983 before the Subordinate Judge, Salem praying for specific 
performance of agreement of sale i.e. the execution and registration 
of the sale deed in respect of the suit properties and delivery of 
548
actual physical possession of the same. The relief prayed for in the 
plaint by the original plaintiff Ayyavoo Udayar is reproduced below:
“Therefore the plaintiff prays that this Honourable Court 
may be pleased to pass a decree for specific performance.
(a)	 Directing the defendants 1 and 2 to execute and 
register the sale deed in respect of the entire suit 
properties for the sum of Rs. 67,000/- and deliver 
actual possession of the entire suit properties to the 
plaintiff, and if the defendants 1 and 2 fail to execute 
the sale deed;
(b)	 The Court may be pleased to execute and register 
the sale deed in respect of the entire suit properties 
for Rs. 67,000/- in favour of the plaintiff and order 
delivery of possession of the suit properties to the 
plaintiff;
(c)	
Directing the defendants 1 and 2 to pay the costs 
of the suit;
(d)	 Directing the defendants 1 and 2 to deduct the value 
of the trees cut by them after the date of the suit 
agreement;
(e)	 Granting such other relief or reliefs as the court may 
deem fit and necessary under the circumstances of 
the case and thus render justice.”
7.	
Ayyavoo Udayar impleaded the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively 
herein in the O.S. No. 514 of 1983 along with the vendors. The 
respondent nos. 1 and 2 herein are the sons of the vendors’ sister 
and were inducted into the suit properties to give an appearance 
that they were in possession of the said properties. Ayyavoo Udayar 
impleaded the respondent nos. 1 and 2 in order to avoid any possible 
obstruction by them and to enable the appellants herein to take 
delivery of possession of the suit properties without multiplicity of 
proceedings. However, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein thought 
fit not to contest suit and allowed the suit to proceed ex parte against 
them. The relevant portion of the plaint is reproduced below:
“10.⁠ ⁠Now that the time for filing the suit is likely to expire 
the plaintiff has been for the past one month requesting 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
549
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
the mediators and the defendants 1 an 2 to see that 
the sale deed is executed and property delivered to the 
plaintiff after completing the registration formalities. But 
the defendants 1 and 2 would not heed to the words of 
the plaintiff nor to that of the mediators like Muthusami 
Udayar son of Arunachala Udayar of Masinaickampatti 
and Chinnasami Udayar of Ayothiapattinam. On the other 
hand the 1st defendant seems to have inducted the 
defendants 2 and 3 into the suit properties to make it 
appear that they (defendants 3 and 4) are in possession 
of the suit properties. The defendants 3 and 4 are the 
1st defendant’s sister’s sons. They are obliged to the 
defendants 1 and 2. All the defendants are now, for the 
past one week giving out in the village by they would not 
on any account allow the plaintiff to have the sale deed 
executed in his favour or to enter into the suit property by 
any means. Hence the plaintiff is constrained to file this 
suit for specific performance. The defendants 3 and 4 
are added in order to avoid any possible obstruction 
by them and to enable the plaintiff to take delivery of 
possession without multiplicity of proceedings.”
(Emphasis supplied)
8.	
The Additional Subordinate Judge, Salem on 02.04.1986 decreed 
the original suit as prayed for and directed the vendors to execute 
the sale deed within one month of the passing of the decree, failing 
which the court would execute the sale deed. Aggrieved by the said 
judgment and decree, the vendors preferred an appeal before the 
High Court. A single judge partly allowed the appeal and modified 
the decree to some extent. The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 did not 
appear in the appeal proceedings as well. 
9.	
The second appeal preferred by the vendors before a division bench 
of the High Court was also dismissed on 19.03.2004 subject to the 
condition that the appellants herein would deposit a further sum of 
Rs. 67,000/- as consideration within a period of one month from the 
date of the order. Though the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein were 
parties to the second appeal yet they did not participate during the 
course of the hearing. Pursuant to the High Court’s direction, the 
appellants deposited a sum of Rs. 67,000/- on 19.04.2004.
550
10.	 Thereafter, the vendors filed a special leave petition before this 
Court challenging the judgment of the High Court dated 19.03.2004, 
which came to be dismissed on 20.01.2006. The vendors thereafter 
preferred a review petition against the said order which also came 
to be dismissed by this Court on 18.04.2006.
11.	 In the meantime, the appellants filed R.E.P. No. 237 of 2004 for 
execution of the sale deed in respect of the suit properties and 
for delivery of possession thereof. All the respondents herein were 
impleaded in the said execution petition and the vendors were 
named as the persons against whom the execution of the decree 
was sought. The said petition was dismissed on 03.12.2004 by the 
ASJ on the ground that a special leave petition filed by the vendors 
before this Court remained pending. 
12.	 The appellants, aggrieved by the dismissal of the execution petition, 
filed Civil Revision Petition (NPD) No. 2032 of 2005 before the High 
Court and simultaneously filed another R.E.P. No. 244 of 2005 for 
getting the sale deed executed in respect of the suit properties and 
for delivery of possession thereof. The High Court vide its order dated 
21.02.2006 allowed the CRP (NPD) No. 2032 of 2005 observing 
that the ASJ had provided no reason for dismissing the execution 
petition of the appellants except that the special leave petition filed 
by the respondents herein remained pending. Since the special leave 
petition before this Court came to be disposed on 20.01.2006, the 
order of the ASJ dated 03.12.2004 was set aside. 
13.	 Consequent to the order of the High Court dated 20.01.2006, the 
proceedings in respect of the R.E.P. No. 237 of 2004 were restored 
and the appellants withdrew the R.E.P. No. 244 of 2005. 
14.	 Thereafter, the vendors filed Civil Revision Petition (NPD) No. 1865 
of 2007 before the High Court challenging the order of the ASJ 
accepting the deposit of Rs. 67,000/- made by the appellants on 
19.04.2004 on the ground that such deposit was not made within a 
period of thirty days as per the order dated 19.03.2004 of the High 
Court. This revision petition came to be dismissed by the High Court 
on 10.07.2007 and it was observed that the appellants herein were 
late by one day in depositing the amount of Rs. 67,000/- because 
18.04.2004 was the last day to deposit the amount and it was a 
holiday. Since the appellants had deposited the amount on the next 
working day, the deposit was considered as well within time. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
551
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
15.	 On 17.08.2007, the Executing Court executed a registered sale 
deed in favour of the appellants on behalf of all the respondents 
to the original suit including the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein 
who were in possession of the property but did not hold any title in 
respect thereof. 
16.	 Aggrieved by the inclusion of the names of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 
in the sale deed, the vendors filed the Civil Revision Petition (NPD) 
No. 3916 of 2007 before the High Court for deletion of the names 
of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein. The appellants also filed a 
memo in this regard and agreed to the deletion of the names of the 
respondent Nos. 1 and 2 from the sale deed. The High Court, by way 
of its order dated 08.01.2008 allowed the deletion of the names of the 
two respondents and directed the Executing Court to carry out the 
requisite rectifications to the sale deed in this regard. Accordingly, a 
rectification deed dated 25.01.2008 came to be executed removing 
the names of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein as the vendors 
from the sale deed. 
17.	 On 12.02.2008, the Executing Court passed an order for delivery of 
possession of the suit property to the appellants herein. Pursuant to 
the said order, the appellants along with the Village Administrative 
Officer, Surveyor and Court Amin reached at the site of the property 
to give effect to the order for delivery of possession. However, the 
handing over of the possession of the property was obstructed by 
the respondent No. 1 herein who threatened to self immolate himself 
if anybody dared to enter the property. As the delivery of possession 
could not be effected, a delivery warrant and obstruction report were 
filed before the ASJ on 20.02.2008. 
18.	 Subsequently, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein filed an application 
dated 12.03.2008 under Section 47 of the CPC (“R.E.A. 163 of 
2011”) before the ASJ on the following grounds:
(1)	 no notice regarding execution of the sale deed and delivery 
of possession was served upon them due to which they were 
unable to avail a fair chance of putting forth their objections; 
(2)	 since their names were deleted from the sale deed so executed, 
the same was not binding upon them and the executing court 
had illegally added their names in the list of parties in the order 
for delivery of possession; 
(3)	 the appellants herein had acted fraudulently. 
552
An interim relief was also prayed for by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 
herein to stay the operation of the execution order, which directed 
delivery of possession of the suit property to the appellants.
19.	 After filing the execution application, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 
herein filed a petition before the Tehsildar, Vazhapadi for inclusion 
of their names in the cultivation account for the suit property 
retrospectively from 1974 submitting that they were in possession of 
the same since 1967. The series of orders delivered in this regard 
are detailed below:
a)	
The Tehsildar, Vazhapadi vide order dated 18.10.2008 held 
that the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein were in possession 
of the suit property and ordered that their names be entered 
in the cultivation account of the same. The Tehsildar, however, 
gave no finding regarding inclusion of the respondents’ names 
retrospectively from 1974.
b)	
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein, aggrieved by the order 
dated 18.10.2008, filed W.P. No. 5032/09 before the Telsildar, 
Vazhapadi to get their names registered in the cultivation account 
in respect of the suit property from 1974 onwards. While the 
hearing of the writ petition was going on, the vendors, whose 
names were registered as pattadharars for the suit property, 
gave a statement that the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had been in 
possession of the said land for a long time and that the vendors 
did not have any objection to the inclusion of their names in 
the cultivation account of the suit property. Upon examination 
of relevant documents and the Village Administrative Officer, 
the Tehsildar recorded that as the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 
had been in enjoyment of the suit property for a long time, the 
inclusion of their names in the cultivation account for the year 
2008 was correct. However, their names cannot be entered in 
the cultivation account as persons being in possession of the 
suit property from 1974 onwards.
c)	
Aggrieved by the non-inclusion of their names in the cultivation 
account for the suit property retrospectively from 1974, the 
respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein appealed to the Revenue 
Divisional Officer. It was held by the Revenue Divisional Officer 
vide order dated 29.10.2009 that there is no provision in law 
to enter the names of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in the 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
553
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
cultivation accounts retrospectively from 1974 as such accounts 
had already been closed and hence, no alteration could be 
made therein. The respondents were granted leave to file an 
application before the Tehsildar for issuance of a certificate 
that they were in possession of the suit property since 1974. 
20.	 The R.E.A. No. 163 of 2011 was initially rejected by the ASJ. 
Consequently, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein filed Civil Revision 
Petition (NPD) No. 2354 of 2008 before the High Court. The High 
Court vide order dated 25.04.2011 set aside the ASJ’s order, which 
rejected the execution application and observed that the same was 
not passed on merits. The High Court directed the lower court to 
dispose of the Execution Application filed under Section 47 of the 
CPC read with Section 151 thereof and pass appropriate orders 
within the time specified in the order.
21.	 Pursuant to the directions of the High Court, the ASJ vide order 
dated 12.08.2011 allowed R.E.A. No. 163/2011 of the respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 herein and held as follows:
a)	
The High Court, while executing the sale deed, ordered for 
deletion of the names of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein as 
they were not the vendors who had title to sell the suit property. 
b)	
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 by way of oral and documentary 
evidence have established that they were in possession of 
the suit property. On the other hand, the appellants herein did 
not examine any independent witnesses to establish that the 
respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were not in possession of the suit 
property. 
c)	
Further, in both the execution petitions namely R.E.P. No. 237 
of 2004 and R.E.P. No. 244 of 2005, the appellants did not 
seek any relief for delivery of possession from the respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2. 
d)	
The appellants can take over possession only after taking 
appropriate legal steps/proceedings. 
22.	 Aggrieved by the order of the ASJ, the appellants filed Civil Revision 
Petition (NPD) No. 4311 of 2011 (hereinafter referred to as the “first 
revision petition”) before the High Court. The grounds taken in the 
said petition are summarized below:
554
a)	
The order of the ASJ dated 12.08.2011 rejecting the appellants’ 
prayer on the ground that no notice of execution of the sale 
deed by the court was served to the respondent Nos. 1 and 2, 
was erroneous since notice to show cause against execution is 
necessary only in certain circumstances as laid down in Order 
XXI Rule 22 of the CPC. It was submitted that no notice was 
mandatory in the case on hand as the execution petition was 
filed by the decree-holder within two years of the confirmation 
of the decree by the High Court.
b)	
The Executing Court failed to consider that the respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 were impleaded as defendants in O.S. No. 514 
of 1983 and were aware of the decree passed against them 
therein on 02.04.1986. Further, the respondent Nos. 1 and 
2, by their own admission, were fully aware of the decree for 
delivery of possession passed against them and as such the 
allegations that they were not aware of the events subsequent 
thereto cannot be a ground to obstruct the execution of decree 
by way of a petition under Section 47 of the CPC. 
c)	
Subsequent to the execution of agreement to sell between the 
appellants and vendors, the respondent no. 1 herein had filed an 
O.S. No. 1384 of 1980 for permanent injunction against Ayyavoo 
Udayar, the vendors, respondent no. 2 herein as well as his 
father, Venkatasamy Naidu. The said suit was subsequently 
dismissed. However, such actions of the respondent No. 1 would 
indicate that the contesting respondents herein were aware 
about the agreement to sell before the institution of the suit 
for specific performance in which they were parties. Therefore, 
the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had no good reason to contend 
that they were not aware of the proceedings especially when 
they continued to remain parties to the dispute in the original 
suit till it attained finality by way of a judgment of this Court. 
d)	
The Executing Court also did not take into consideration the 
fact that the execution application of the respondent Nos. 1 
and 2 could not have been allowed because a sale deed had 
already been executed by the ASJ in favour of the appellants 
and against the vendors. The prayer for delivery of possession 
was a consequential relief. The rejection of the said prayer by 
the Executing Court based on hyper technical objections raised 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
555
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2, could have been cured by 
amending the prayer in R.E.P. No. 237 of 2004. 
23.	 A week after the first revision petition i.e. on 08.11.2011, the appellants 
filed the R.E.A. No. 14 of 2012 under Order VI Rule 17 read with 
Section 151 of the CPC for amendments in the R.E.P. No. 237 of 
2004. The appellants sought to record that the respondents’ SLP 
and Review Petition pursuant to the proceedings in the original 
suit for specific performance, came to be dismissed by this Court. 
Further, the appellants sought amendment of the prayer made in 
the execution petition asking for execution of the sale deed on 
behalf of the vendors and delivery of possession against all the 
respondents. The vendors in their counter-statement alleged that 
the said execution application was preferred by the appellants with 
a mala fide intention and seeking amendment to the array of parties 
against whom execution was prayed for, after a lapse of seven and 
a half years was legally untenable.
24.	 The appellants, on 10.04.2013, sought for one another amendment 
by way of R.E.A. No. 145 of 2013 seeking to disclose about the 
other execution petitions filed after R.E.P. No. 237 of 2004. The 
vendors filed a counter-statement to the same alleging that said 
amendment application was filed with an ulterior motive of delaying 
the execution proceedings. The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein 
also filed a counter submitting that they were not parties to the 
R.E.P. No. 237 of 2004 as they were not issued notice regarding 
the same. They came into knowledge of the execution proceedings 
only after the court Amin visited the property to deliver possession 
of the property to the appellants. 
25.	 The ASJ vide two separate orders dated 24.04.2015 allowed the 
execution petition on the ground that the appellants had not made any 
prayer in the execution petition against the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 
and since the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had proved their possession 
of the suit property, the appellants could take possession only after 
taking necessary legal steps. It was held that since the appellants 
had not preferred any appeal or revision against the order dated 
12.08.2011, the same had become final and binding on the parties. 
As a result, the orders allowing R.E.P. 237 of 2004 would have no 
effect and therefore, the question of amendment of the same did 
not arise. The appellants challenged the order dated 24.04.2015 by 
556
way of Civil Revision Petition (NPD) No. 2151 of 2015 (hereinafter 
referred to as the “second revision petition”). 
Impugned Order of the High Court 
26.	 The High Court vide its common order (the “impugned order”) held 
as follows:
a)	
The ASJ’s order allowing the respondents’ execution application 
under Section 47 was correct on the aspect of serving of 
notice. The appellants although were aware of the fact that 
the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were in possession of the suit 
property yet they did not ask the court to serve notice to the said 
respondents. Since no notice was provided to the respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2, the court could not have passed a direction for 
delivery of possession.
b)	
The appellants did not take any steps to amend the execution 
petition R.E.P. No. 237 of 2004 till the disposal of the 
respondents’ execution application R.E.A. No. 163 of 2011 
under Section 47 of the CPC. Once the said application was 
allowed, there remained no execution proceedings pending so 
far as the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were concerned. Therefore, 
the amendment applications filed in R.E.A. No. 14 of 2012 and 
R.E.A. No. 145 of 2015 were held to be non-maintainable.
c)	
The appellants did not prefer any appeal against the order of 
the ASJ dated 12.08.2011 allowing the application under Section 
47 of the CPC, till 2015 and no reasons were assigned by the 
appellants for such delay.
d)	
Thus, the High Court held that there was no material irregularity 
in the orders of the ASJ dated 12.08.2011 and 24.04.2015 
respectively and upheld the same.
B.	
SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELLANTS
27.	 Mr. Senthil Jagadeesan, the learned senior counsel appearing on 
behalf of the appellants submitted that the High Court could be said 
to have committed a serious error in passing the impugned order 
for the following reasons:
a.	
The appellants had not filed any appeal or revision against the 
order of the ASJ allowing the application under Section 47 of 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
557
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
the CPC, till 2015. However, the appellants had challenged the 
said order by preferring the first revision petition as early as 
31.10.2011 and the same was decided by the High Court by 
way of the impugned order.
b.	
The appellants had filed the execution petition on 19.07.2004 
that is, after four months of confirmation of the decree in the 
original suit by the High Court. The learned counsel invited 
our attention to the provision in Order 21 Rule 22 of the CPC, 
which stipulates that a notice to show cause against execution 
is required to be served compulsorily only if the application for 
such execution is made, inter alia, more than two years after 
the date of the decree. He submitted that in view of the said 
provision, no separate notice was required to be issued to the 
judgment debtors in the case on hand as the execution petition 
was filed well within the time period of two years. 
c.	
The contention of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 that they 
were not aware about the execution petition was erroneously 
accepted by the High Court. The High Court failed to notice 
that the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 had appeared through their 
counsel in CRP No. 2032 of 2005 by way of which the R.E.P. 
No. 237 of 2004 was restored. Therefore, the respondents were 
fully aware about the resumption of proceedings before the 
Executing Court but still chose not to participate therein. Though 
served with the summons in the original suit proceedings, yet 
they chose not to appear, contest or challenge the decree 
therein as well. 
d.	
The appellants’ application for amending the execution petition 
was squarely within the framework of the decree and ought to 
have been allowed by the High Court in light of the judgments 
of this Court in State of Bihar & Ors. v. Bihar Rajya Bhumi 
Vikas Bank Samiti reported in (2018) 9 SCC 472 and Salem 
Advocate Bar Association v. Union of India reported in (2005) 
6 SCC 344. It has been held in these decisions that rules of 
procedure are made to advance the cause of justice and not to 
defeat it. The courts ought to adopt such construction of rules 
or procedure that prevents miscarriage of justice.
28.	 Mr. Jagadeesan further submitted that a clear case of collusion 
between the vendors and the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 is made 
558
out. The attempt is to frustrate the decree and thereby deprive the 
appellants of its fruits. The same is evident from the following facts:
a)	
The names of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were deleted 
from the sale deed executed by the Executing Court at the 
behest of the vendors, who facilitated the filing of objections 
by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 by getting their names removed 
from the sale deed.
b)	
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 applied for registration of their 
names in the cultivation account of the suit property only in 
2008 that is, four years after the confirmation of the decree by 
the High Court. Though they had prayed for inclusion of their 
names in the revenue records from 1974 onwards, yet the 
revenue authorities allowed for such inclusion only from 2008 
onwards. Further, their names were included in the revenue 
records solely because of the “no objection” from the vendors 
and not because of any independent right that they possessed.
C.	
SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT NOS. 1 & 2
29.	 Mr. Rahul Jain, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent Nos. 1 and 2 addressed himself on the following points:
i.	
The decree travelled beyond the judgment,
ii.	
No effective proceedings were instituted by the appellants 
against the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein,
iii.	
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have a lawful title and have been 
in lawful and uninterrupted possession of the suit properties 
since 1967,
iv.	
The appellants had not instituted any suit for recovery of 
possession, and
v.	
The civil courts inherently lacked jurisdiction to decide the 
question of possession as the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were 
cultivating tenants.
30.	 The learned counsel submitted that the original suit was for specific 
performance of the agreement of sale of the suit property and 
respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were not parties to the said agreement. 
They were impleaded in the original suit stating that they were in 
possession of the suit property. Even though the appellants were 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
559
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
aware of the said fact, yet they did not pray for dispossession of 
the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and no pleadings were made against 
them. 
31.	 Further, the trial court’s order dated 02.04.1986, having considered 
the issue of possession, decreed the suit “as prayed for”. The decree 
of the trial court dated 02.04.1986 is reproduced below:
“This suit coming on 21.3.1986 for final hearing before 
me in the presence of Thiru. A. Duraisami, Counsel for 
the plaintiff and of G. Perumal counsel for the defendants 
and having stood over till this day for consideration this 
court doth order and decree as follows:-
1.	
that the defendants 1 and 2 do execute the sale deed 
for Rs. 67000/- in favour of the plaintiff in respect of 
the entire suit properties described hereunder within 
one month from this date and register the same;
2.	
that the plaintiff to deposit the balance of Rs. 57000/-
into court to perform the sale agreement;
3.	
that the defendants 1 and 2 are at liberty to withdraw 
the said sum from the court: after executing the sale 
deed and register it in favour of the plaintiff.
4.	
that the defendants do deliver possession of the suit 
properties to the plaintiff; (…)”
32.	 The learned counsel submitted that while Clause 4 of the decree 
directed that “the defendants do deliver possession of the suit 
properties to the plaintiff”, such general language should be read 
within the context of the wordings in the other directions issued 
by the decree, the reasoning of the trial court in its judgment, and 
the specific prayer sought in the original plaint, as the suit was for 
specific performance.
33.	 Mr. Jain relied on the decision of this Court in Rajinder Kumar v. 
Kuldeep Singh reported in (2014) 15 SCC 529 to submit that the 
question of alternative reliefs does not arise in case of a suit for 
specific performance, when it is decreed as prayed for. The relevant 
portion of the judgment relied upon is reproduced below:
“21. If the suit for specific performance is not decreed as 
prayed for, then alone the question of any reference to 
560
the alternative relief would arise. Therefore, there is no 
question of any ambiguity. As held by this Court in Topanmal 
Chhotamal v. Kundomal Gangaram and consistently 
followed thereafter, even if there is any ambiguity, it is for 
the executing court to construe the decree if necessary 
after referring to the judgment. If sufficient guidance is 
not available even from the judgment, the court is even 
free to refer to the pleadings so as to construe the true 
import of the decree. No doubt, the court cannot go behind 
the decree or beyond the decree. But while executing a 
decree for specific performance, the court, in case of any 
ambiguity, has necessarily to construe the decree so as 
to give effect to the intention of the parties.”
34.	 As regards the question whether the appellants had instituted an 
effective proceeding against the respondent Nos. 1 and 2, the learned 
counsel submitted that:
a.	
The respondents were not a necessary party to the original 
suit for specific performance as they were neither parties 
to the agreement of sale nor lis pendens purchasers of the 
suit properties. The appellants sought no relief of possession 
against the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in the original suit despite 
impleading them as parties because they were in actual physical 
possession of the suit properties.
b.	
In R.E.P. 237 of 2004, the appellants sought relief only against 
the vendors and not against the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 
despite impleading them in the execution petition. Further, no 
notice was served to the said respondents and as a result, the 
respondents were not afforded an opportunity to be heard by 
the Executing Court. 
c.	
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were also not parties to the sale 
deed registered by the Executing Court and their names were 
deleted therefrom without any objection by the appellants. 
35.	 The learned counsel, with a view to establish that the respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 were in lawful and uninterrupted possession of the suit 
properties since 1967, submitted as follows:
a.	
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 stated that their father was in 
possession of the suit property since 1967 and was cultivating 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
561
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
the land. After his demise in 1983, the respondents have been 
in continuous possession of the suit property.
b.	
Further, the order of the Revenue Divisional Officer dated 
29.10.2009 held that the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have been in 
enjoyment of suit property for over 40 years and the certificate 
of possession issued in this regard recognizes the same. 
36.	 On the question whether the appellants were supposed to bring a 
separate suit for recovery of possession, Mr. Jain submitted that:
a.	
The appellants, despite being aware that the respondent Nos. 
1 and 2 were in possession of the suit property, brought no 
suit for recovery of possession against them. The onus was 
on the appellants to establish that they had a better title to the 
suit property as against the continuous possession claimed by 
the respondent Nos. 1 and 2. 
b.	
The learned counsel relied on this Court’s decision in Smriti 
Debbarma v. Prabha Ranjan Debbarma reported in 2023 SCC 
OnLine SC 9 to contend that the appellants could not have 
claimed possession by way of mere execution proceedings 
without first establishing a better title to the properties in 
question. The relevant portion of the judgment relied upon is 
reproduced below:
“(…) The defendants cannot be dispossessed unless 
the plaintiff has established a better title and rights 
over the Schedule ‘A’ property. A person in possession 
of land in the assumed character as the owner, and 
exercising peaceably the ordinary rights of ownership, 
has a legal right against the entire world except the 
rightful owner. A decree of possession cannot be 
passed in favour of the plaintiff on the ground that 
defendant nos. 1 to 12 have not been able to fully 
establish their right, title and interest in the Schedule 
‘A’ property. The defendants, being in possession, 
would be entitled to protect and save their possession, 
unless the person who seeks to dispossess them 
has a better legal right in the form of ownership or 
entitlement to possession.”
c.	
Further, the appellants, being the decree holders, failed to file 
an application to seek recovery of possession under Order XXI 
562
Rule 97, after having been obstructed by the respondents. Such 
process could not have been circumvented by the appellants 
by seeking an amendment to their execution petition, especially 
after the respondents’ Section 47 application had already been 
allowed by the Executing Court.
37.	 Mr. Jain further submitted that the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are 
cultivating tenants in continuous possession of the suit property and 
accordingly are protected under Sections 3 and 6 of the Tamil Nadu 
Cultivating Tenants’ Protection Act, 1955 respectively which imposes 
a bar on the jurisdiction of the civil courts in matters of eviction of 
cultivating tenants.
38.	 The learned counsel relied on this Court’s decision in Sunder 
Dass v. Ram Prakash reported in (1977) 2 SCC 662 to submit that a 
challenge to the validity of a decree can be set up even at the stage 
of execution proceedings, in cases where the civil court inherently 
lacks jurisdiction. The relevant portion of the judgment relied upon 
is reproduced below:
“3. Now, the law is well settled that an executing court 
cannot go behind the decree nor can it question its 
legality or correctness. But there is one exception to this 
general rule and that is that where the decree sought to 
be executed is a nullity for lack of inherent jurisdiction 
in the court passing it, its invalidity can be set up in an 
execution proceeding. Where there is lack of inherent 
jurisdiction, it goes to the root of the competence of the 
court to try the case and a decree which is a nullity is void 
and can be declared to be void by any court in which it is 
presented. Its nullity can be set up whenever and wherever 
it is sought to be enforced or relied upon and even at 
the stage of execution or even in collateral proceedings. 
The executing court can, therefore, entertain an objection 
that the decree is a nullity and can refuse to execute the 
decree. By doing so, the executing court would not incur 
the reproach that it is going behind the decree, because 
the decree being null and void, there would really be no 
decree at all. Vide Kiran Singh v. Chaman Paswan [AIR 
1954 SC 340 : (1955) 1 SCR 117] and Seth Hiralal Patni 
v. Sri Kali Nath [AIR 1962 SC 199 : (1962) 2 SCR 747]. 
It is, therefore, obvious that in the present case, it was 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
563
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
competent to the executing court to examine whether 
the decree for eviction was a nullity on the ground that 
the civil court had no inherent jurisdiction to entertain the 
suit in which the decree for eviction was passed. If the 
decree for eviction was a nullity, the executing court could 
declare it to be such and decline to execute it against the 
respondent.” 
39.	 In the last, the learned counsel submitted that the Executing Court 
and High Court were correct in allowing the application under Section 
47 to afford the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to prove their long and 
continuous possession of the suit property as cultivating tenants. 
D.	
ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED
40.	 Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and 
having gone through the materials on record, the following questions 
fall for our consideration:
(i)	
Whether the courts below committed any error in upholding the 
objections raised by the respondent nos. 1 and 2 herein against 
execution of the decree on the claim of being in possession of 
the suit property in their capacity as cultivating tenants? 
(ii)	
Whether the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are entitled to the 
protection of the Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants’ Protection Act, 
1955 and could the Executing Court have decided the question 
of validity of the decree on this ground? 
E.	
ANALYSIS
(i)	
Relevant statutory provisions
41.	 Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we 
must refer to few relevant provisions of the CPC, which read thus :-
Section 47 reads as follows:
“47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing 
decree.
(1) All questions arising between the parties to the suit in 
which the decree was passed, or their representatives, 
and relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of 
564
the decree, shall be determined by the Court executing 
the decree and not by a separate suit.
(3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or 
is not the representative of a party, such question shall, for 
the purposes of this section, be determined by the Court.
Explanation 1.-- For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff 
whose suit has been dismissed and a defendant against 
whom a suit has been dismissed are parties to the suit.
Explanation II.-- (a) For the purposes of this section, a 
purchaser of property at a sale in execution of a decree 
shall be deemed to be a party to the suit in which the 
decree is passed; and
(b) all questions relating to the delivery of possession of 
such property to such purchaser or his representative 
shall be deemed to be questions relating to the execution, 
discharge or satisfaction of the decree within the meaning 
of this section.”
Order XXI, Rule 35 reads as follows:
“35. Decree for immovable property.-
(1) Where a decree is for the delivery of any immovable 
property, possession thereof shall be delivered to the 
party to whom it has been adjudged, or to such person as 
he may appoint to receive delivery on his behalf, and, if 
necessary, by removing any person bound by the decree 
who refuses to vacate the property.
(2) Where a decree is for the joint possession of immovable 
property, such possession shall be delivered by affixing 
a copy of the warrant in some conspicuous place on 
the property and proclaiming the beat of drum, or other 
customary mode, at some convenient place, the substance 
of the decree.
(3) Where possession of any building on enclosure is to 
be delivered and the person in possession, being bound 
by the decree, does not afford free access, the Court, 
through its officers, may, after giving reasonable warning 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
565
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
and facility to any woman not appearing in public according 
to the customs of the country to withdraw, remove or open 
any lock or bolt or break open any door or do any other 
act necessary for putting the decree-holder in possession.”
Order XXI, Rule 97 reads as follows:
“97. Resistance or obstruction to possession of 
immovable property:-
(1) Where the holder of a decree for the possession of 
immovable property or the purchaser of any such property 
sold in execution of a decree is resisted or obstructed by 
any person in obtaining possession of the property, he 
may make an application to the Court complaining of such 
resistance or obstruction.
2) Where any application is made under sub-rule (1), the 
Court shall proceed to adjudicate the upon the application 
in accordance with the provisions herein contained.”
Order XXI, Rule 98 reads as follows:
“98. Orders after adjudication. 
(1) Upon the determination of the questions referred 
to in rule 101, the Court shall, in accordance with such 
determination and subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2),-
(a) make an order allowing the application and directing 
that the applicant be put into the possession of the property 
or dismissing the application; or 
(b) pass such other order as, in the circumstances of the 
case, it may deem fit.
(2) Where, upon such determination, the Court is satisfied 
that the resistance or obstruction was occasioned without 
any just cause by the judgment-debtor or by some other 
person at his instigation or on his behalf, or by any 
transferee, where such transfer was made during the 
pendency of the suit or execution proceeding, it shall direct 
that the applicant be put into possession of the property, 
and where the applicant is still resisted or obstructed in 
566
obtaining possession, the Court may also, at the instance 
of the applicant, order the judgment-debtor, or any person 
acting at his instigation or on his behalf, to be detained in 
the civil prison for a term which may extend to thirty days.”
Order XXI, Rule 99 reads as follows:
“99. Dispossession by decree-holder or purchaser :-
(1) Where any person other than the judgment-debtor 
is dispossessed of immovable property by the holder of 
a decree for the possession of such property or, where 
such property has been sold in execution of a decree, by 
the purchaser thereof, he may make an application to the 
Court complaining of such dispossession. 
(2) Where any such application is made, the Court shall 
proceed to adjudicate upon the application in accordance 
with the provisions herein contained.”
Order XXI, Rule 100 reads as follows:
“100. Order to be passed upon application complaining 
of dispossession. 
Upon the determination of the questions referred to 
in rule 101, the Court shall, in accordance with such 
determination,-
(a) make an order allowing the application and directing 
that the applicant be put into the possession of the property 
or dismissing the application; or 
(b) pass such other order as, in the circumstances of the 
case, it may deem fit.”
Order XXI, Rule 101 reads as follows:
“101. Question to be determined:-
All questions (including questions relating to right, title or 
interest in the property) arising between the parties to a 
proceeding on an application under rule 97 or rule 99 or 
their representatives, and relevant to the adjudication of 
the application, shall be determined by the Court dealing 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
567
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
with the application and not by a separate suit and for 
this purpose, the Court shall, notwithstanding anything 
to the contrary contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, be deemed to have jurisdiction to decide 
such questions.”
Order XXI, Rule 103 reads as follows:
“103. Orders to be treated as decrees.
Where any application has been adjudicated upon under 
rule 98 or rule 100 the other made thereon shall have the 
same force and be subject to the same conditions as to 
an appeal or otherwise as if it were a decree.”
(ii)	
Nature of application under Order XXI Rule 97
42.	 It is a settled position of law that an application under Order XXI Rule 
97 may be made in respect of obstruction raised by any person in 
obtaining possession of the decretal property. The courts adjudicating 
such application have to do so in accordance with Rule 101 and hold 
a full-fledged inquiry to determine all questions including questions 
relating to right, title or interest in the property arising between the 
parties.
43.	 This Court in Brahmdeo Chaudhary v. Rishikesh Prasad Jaiswal 
reported in (1997) 3 SCC 697, has held that :-
“4. (…) A conjoint reading of Order XXI Rules 97, 98, 99 
and 101 projects the following picture:
(1) If a decree-holder is resisted or obstructed in execution 
of the decree for possession with the result that the decree 
for possession could not be executed in the normal manner 
by obtaining warrant for possession under Order XXI Rule 
35, then the decree-holder has to move an application 
under Order XXI Rule 97 for removal of such obstruction 
and after hearing the decree-holder and the obstructionist 
the Court can pass appropriate orders after adjudicating 
upon the controversy between the parties as enjoined by 
Order XXI Rule 97 sub-rule (2) read with Order XXI Rule 
98. It is obvious that after such adjudication if it is found 
that the resistance or obstruction was occasioned without 
568
just cause by the judgment-debtor or by some other person 
at his instigation or on his behalf then such obstruction 
or resistance would be removed as per Order XXI Rule 
98 sub-rule (2) and the decree-holder would be permitted 
to be put in possession. Even in such an eventuality the 
order passed would be treated as a decree under Order 
XXI Rule 101 and no separate suit would lie against such 
order meaning thereby the only remedy would be to prefer 
an appeal before the appropriate appellate court against 
such deemed decree.
(2) If for any reason a stranger to the decree is already 
dispossessed of the suit property relating to which he 
claims any right, title or interest before his getting any 
opportunity to resist or offer obstruction on spot on account 
of his absence from the place or for any other valid reason 
then his remedy would lie in filing an application under 
Order XXI Rule 99, CPC claiming that his dispossession 
was illegal and that possession deserves to be restored 
to him. If such an application is allowed after adjudication 
then as enjoined by Order XXI Rule 98 sub-rule (1) CPC 
the Executing Court can direct the stranger applicant under 
Order XXI Rule 99 to be put in possession of the property 
of if his application is found to be substanceless it has to 
be dismissed. Such an order passed by the Executing 
Court disposing of the application one way or the other 
under Order XXI Rule 98 sub-rule (1) would be deemed 
to be a decree as laid down by Order XXI Rule 103 and 
would be appealable before appropriate appellate forum. 
But no separate suit would lie against such orders as 
clearly enjoined by Order XXI Rule 101.
5. In short the aforesaid statutory provisions of Order 
XXI lay down a complete code for resolving all disputes 
pertaining to execution of decree for possession obtained 
by a decree-holder and whose attempts at executing the 
said decree meet with rough weather. Once resistance is 
offered by a purported stranger to the decree and which 
comes to be noted by the Executing Court as well as by 
the decree-holder the remedy available to the decree- 
holder against such an obstructionist in only under Order 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
569
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
XXI Rule 97 sub-rule (1) and he cannot bypass such 
obstruction and insist on re- issuance of warrant for 
possession under Order XXI Rule 35 with the help of 
police force, as that course would amount to bypassing 
and circumventing the procedure laid down under Order 
XXI Rule 97 in connection with removal of obstruction 
of purported strangers to the decree. Once such an 
obstruction is on the record of the Executing Court it is 
difficult to appreciate how the Executing Court can tell 
such obstructionist that he must first lose possession 
and then only his remedy is to move an application 
under Order XXI Rule 99, CPC and pray for restoration 
of possession. The High Court by the impugned order 
and judgment has taken the view that the only remedy 
available to a stranger to the decree who claims any 
independent right, title or interest in the decretal property 
is to go by Order XXI Rule 99. This view of the High 
Court on the aforesaid statutory scheme is clearly 
unsustainable. It is easy to visualise that a stranger to the 
decree who claims an independent right, title and interest 
in the decretal property can offer his resistance before 
getting actually dispossessed. He can equally agitate his 
grievance and claim for adjudication of his independent 
right, title and interest in the decretal property even after 
losing possession as per Order XXI Rule 99. Order XXI 
Rule 97 deals with a stage which is prior to the actual 
execution of the decree for possession wherein the 
grievance of the obstructionist can be adjudicated upon 
before actual delivery of possession to the decree-holder. 
While Order XXI Rule 99 on the other hand deals with 
the subsequent stage in the execution proceedings where 
a stranger claiming any right, title and interest in the 
decretal property might have got actually dispossessed 
and claims restoration of possession on adjudication of 
his independent right, title and interest dehors the interest 
of the judgment-debtor. Both these types of enquiries in 
connection with the right, title and interest of a stranger 
to the decree are clearly contemplated by the aforesaid 
scheme of Order XXI and it is not as if that such a stranger 
to the decree can come in the picture only at the final 
570
stage after losing the possession and not before it if he 
is vigilant enough to raise his objection and obstruction 
before the warrant for possession gets actually executed 
against him With respect the High Court has totally ignored 
the scheme of Order XXI Rule 97 in this connection by 
taking the view that only remedy of such stranger to 
the decree lies under Order XXI Rule 99 and he has no 
locus standi to get adjudication of his claim prior to the 
actual delivery of possession to the decree-holder in 
the execution proceedings. The view taken by the High 
Court in this connection also results in patent breach of 
principles of natural justice as the obstructionist, who 
alleges to have any independent right, title and interest 
in the decretal property and who is admittedly not a party 
to the decree even though making a grievance right in 
time before the warrant for execution is actually executed, 
would be told off the gates and his grievance would not 
be considered or heard or merits and he would be thrown 
off lock, stock and barrel by use of police force by the 
decree-holder. That would obviously result in irreparable 
injury to such obstructionist whose grievance would go 
overboard without being considered on merits and such 
obstructionist would be condemned totally unheard. Such 
an order of the Executing Court, therefore, would fail also 
on the ground of non- compliance with basic principles 
of natural justice. On the contrary the statutory scheme 
envisaged by Order XXI Rule 97, CPC as discussed 
earlier clearly guards against such a pitfall and provides 
a statutory remedy both to the decree- holder as well as 
to the obstructionist to have their respective say in the 
matter and to get proper adjudication before the Executing 
Court and it is that adjudication which subject to the 
hierarchy of appeals would remain binding between the 
parties to such proceedings and separate suit would be 
barred with a view to seeing that multiplicity of proceedings 
and parallel proceedings are avoided and the gamut laid 
down by Order XXI Rules 97 and 103 would remain a 
complete code and the sole remedy for the concerned 
parties to have their grievances once and for all finally 
resolved in execution proceedings themselves.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
571
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
6.(…) A reading of Order 21, Rule 97 CPC clearly 
envisages that “any person” even including the 
judgment-debtor irrespective whether he claims 
derivative title from the judgment-debtor or set up 
his own right, title or interest dehors the judgment-
debtor and he resists execution of a decree, then the 
court in addition to the power under Rule 35(3) has 
been empowered to conduct an enquiry whether the 
obstruction by that person in obtaining possession 
of immovable property was legal or not. The decree-
holder gets a right under Rule 97 to make an application 
against third parties to have his obstruction removed 
and an enquiry thereon could be done. Each occasion 
of obstruction or resistance furnishes a cause of action 
to the decree-holder to make an application for removal 
of the obstruction or resistance by such person (…)”
(Emphasis supplied)
44.	 In Shreenath (supra), the application under Order XXI Rule 97 was 
filed by the tenants who were not parties to the suit. The question 
was whether the tenants could maintain an application under Order 
XXI Rule 97. This Court while interpreting the words ‘any person’ 
held that any person includes even persons not bound by the decree. 
Paragraphs 10 and 11 read thus :-
“10. Under sub-clause 1 order 21, Rule 35, the Executing 
Court delivers actual physical possession of the disputed 
property to the decree-holder and, if necessary, by 
removing any person bound by the decree who refuses 
to vacate the said property. The significant words are 
by removing any person bound by he decree. Order 
21, Rule 36 conceives of immovable property when in 
occupancy of a tenant or other person not bound by the 
decree, the Court delivers possession by fixing a copy 
of the warrant in some conspicuous place of the said 
property and proclaiming to the occupant by beat of drum 
or other customary mode at some convenient place, the 
substance of the decree in regard to the property. In other 
words, the decree-holder gets the symbolic possession. 
Order 21, rule 99 conceives of resistance or obstruction 
572
to the possession of immovable property when made in 
execution of a decree by “ any person”. this may be either 
by the person bound by the decree, claiming title through 
judgment debtor or claiming independent right of his own 
including tenant not party to the suit or even a stranger. 
A decree holder, in such case, may make an application 
to the Executing Court complaining such resistance, for 
delivery of possession of the property. Sub-clause (2) 
after 1976 substitution empowers the executing Courts 
when such claim is made to proceed to adjudicate upon 
the applicants claim in accordance with provisions 
contained hereinafter. This refers to Order 21, Rule 101 
(As amended by 1976 Act) under which all questions 
relating to right, title or interest in the property arising 
between the parties under Order 21, Rule 97 or Rule 99 
shall be determined by the Court and not by a separate 
suit, By the amendment, one has not to go for a fresh 
suit but all matter pertaining to that property even if 
obstructed by a stranger is adjudicated and finality 
given even in the executing proceedings. We find the 
expression “any person” under sub-clause (1) is used 
deliberately for widening the scope of power so that 
the Executing court could adjudicate the claim made 
in any such application under order 21, Rule 97. Thus 
by the use of the words ‘any person’ it includes all 
persons resisting the delivery of possession, claiming 
right in the property even those not bound by the 
decree, includes tenants or other persons claiming 
right on their own including a stranger.
11. So, under Order 21, Rule 101 all disputes between 
the decree-holder and any such person is to be 
adjudicated by the Executing Court. A party is not 
thrown out to relegate itself to the long drawn out 
arduous procedure of a fresh suit. This is to salvage 
the possible hardship both to the decree-holder and 
other person claiming title on their own right to get it 
adjudicated in the very execution proceedings. We find 
that order 21, Rule 35 deals with cases of delivery of 
possession of an immovable property to the decree-
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
573
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
holder by delivery of actual physical possession 
and by removing any person in possession who is 
bound by a decree, while under Order 21, Rule 36 
only symbolic possession is given where tenant is 
in actual possession. Order 21, rule 97 as aforesaid, 
conceives of cases where delivery of possession to 
decree-holder or purchaser is resisted by any person. 
‘Any person’ , as aforesaid, is wide enough to include 
even a person not bound by a decree or claiming right 
in the property on his own including that of a tenant 
including stranger.”
(Emphasis supplied)
45.	 In Silverline Forum Pvt. Ltd. vs. Rajiv Trust and Anr. reported in 
1998 (3) SCC 723, a three Judge Bench of this Court has observed 
that a third party to the decree including the transferee pendente lite 
can offer resistance or obstruction and his right has to be adjudicated 
under Order XXI Rule 97 of CPC. The relevant portion of the said 
judgment is reproduced below:
“9. At the outset, we may observe that it is difficult to agree 
with the High Court that resistance or obstructions made 
by a third party to the decree of execution cannot be gone 
into under Order 21 Rule 97 of the Code. Rules 97 to 106 
in Order 21 of the Code are subsumed under the caption 
“Resistance to delivery of possession to decree-holder or 
purchaser”. Those rules are intended to deal with every 
sort of resistance or obstructions offered by any person. 
Rule 97 specifically provides that when the holder of a 
decree for possession of immovable property is resisted or 
obstructed by-“any person” in obtaining possession of the 
property such decree-holder has to make an application 
complaining of the resistance or obstruction. Sub-rule (2) 
makes it incumbent on the court to proceed to adjudicate 
upon such complaint in accordance with the procedure 
laid down.
10. It is true that Rule 99 of Order 21 is not available 
to any person until he is dispossessed of immovable 
property by the decree-holder. Rule 101 stipulates 
574
that all questions “arising between the parties to a 
proceeding on an application under rule 97 or rule 
99” shall be determined by the executing court, if 
such questions are “relevant to the adjudication of 
the application”. A third party to the decree who offers 
resistance would thus fall within the ambit of Rule 
101 if an adjudication is warranted as a consequence 
of the resistance or obstruction made by him to the 
execution of the decree. No doubt if the resistance was 
made by a transferee pendente lite of the judgment 
debtor, the scope of the adjudication would be shrunk 
to the limited question whether he is such transferee 
and on a finding in the affirmative regarding that point 
the execution court has to hold that he has no right 
to resist in view of the clear language contained in 
Rule 102. Exclusion of such a transferee from raising 
further contentions is based on the salutary principle 
adumbrated in Section 52 of the Transfer of property 
Act.
--xxx--
14. It is clear that executing court can decide whether 
the resistor or obstructor is a person bound by the 
decree and he refused to vacate the property. That 
question also squarely falls within the adjudicatory 
process contemplated in Order 21 Rule 97(2) of the 
Code. The adjudication mentioned therein need not 
necessarily involve a detailed enquiry or collection of 
evidence. Court can make the adjudication on admitted 
facts or even on the averments made by the resistor. 
Of course the Court can direct the parties to adduce 
evidence for such determination. If the Court deems 
it necessary.”
(Emphasis supplied)
46.	 This Court, in NSS Narayan Sarma & Ors. v. Goldstone Exports 
(P) Ltd. & Ors., reported in (2002) 1 SCC 662, has held as under:-
“15. Provision is made in the Civil Procedure Code for 
delivery of possession of immovable property in execution 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
575
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
of a decree and matters relating thereto. In Order 21 Rule 
35 provisions are made empowering the executing court to 
deliver possession of the property to the decree holder if 
necessary, by removing any person bound by the decree 
who refuses to vacate the property. In Rule 36 provision 
is made for delivery of formal or symbolical possession 
of the property in occupancy of a tenant or other person 
entitled to occupy the same and not bound by the decree 
to relinquish such occupancy. Rules 97 to 101 of Order 
21 contain the provisions enabling the executing court 
to deal with a situation when a decree holder entitled to 
possession of the property encounters obstruction from any 
person. From the provisions in these rules which have been 
quoted earlier the scheme is clear that the legislature has 
vested wide powers in the executing court to deal with all 
issues relating to such matters. It is a general impression 
prevailing amongst the litigant public that difficulties of a 
litigant are by no means over on his getting a decree for 
immovable property in his favour. Indeed, his difficulties 
in real and practical sense, arise after getting the decree. 
Presumably, to tackle such a situation and to allay the 
apprehension in the minds of litigant public that it takes 
years and years for the decree holder to enjoy fruits of 
the decree, the legislature made drastic amendments in 
provisions in the aforementioned Rules, particularly, the 
provision in Rule 101 in which it is categorically declared 
that all questions including questions relating to right, title 
or interest in the property arising between the parties to a 
proceeding on an application under rule 97 or rule 99 or 
their representatives, and relevant to the adjudication of 
the application shall be determined by the Court dealing 
with the application and not by a separate suit and for 
this purpose, the Court shall, notwithstanding anything to 
the contrary contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, be deemed to have jurisdiction to decide such 
questions. On a fair reading of the rule it is manifest that 
the legislature has enacted the provision with a view to 
remove, as far as possible, technical objections to an 
application filed by the aggrieved party whether he is 
the decree holder or any other person in possession 
576
of the immovable property under execution and has 
vested the power in the executing court to deal with all 
questions arising in the matter irrespective of whether 
the Court otherwise has jurisdiction to entertain a 
dispute of the nature. This clear statutory mandate and 
the object and purpose of the provisions should not 
be lost sight of by the Courts seized of an execution 
proceeding. The Court cannot shirk its responsibility 
by skirting the relevant issues arising in the case.
--xxx--
19. From the principles laid down in the decisions noted 
above, the position is manifest that when any person 
claiming title to the property in his possession obstructs the 
attempt by the decree-holder to dispossess him from the 
said property the executing Court is competent to consider 
all questions raised by the persons offering obstruction 
against execution of the decree and pass appropriate 
order which under the provisions of Order 21 Rule 103 is 
to be treated as a decree.”
(Emphasis supplied)
47.	 In Samir Singh and Anr. vs. Abdul Rab, reported in (2015) 1 SCC 
379, this Court, after considering its previous judgment in Brahmadeo 
Chaudhary (supra) has held thus:-
“26. The aforesaid authorities clearly spell out that the court 
has the authority to adjudicate all the questions pertaining 
to right, title or interest in the property arising between 
the parties. It also includes the claim of a stranger 
who apprehends dispossession or has already been 
dispossessed from the immovable property. The self-
contained Code, as has been emphasised by this Court, 
enjoins the executing court to adjudicate the lis and the 
purpose is to avoid multiplicity of proceedings. It is also 
so because prior to 1976 amendment the grievance 
was required to be agitated by filing a suit but after the 
amendment the entire enquiry has to be conducted by 
the executing court. Order XXI, Rule 101 provides for 
the determination of necessary issues. Rule 103 clearly 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
577
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
stipulates that when an application is adjudicated upon 
under Rule 98 or Rule 100 the said order shall have the 
same force as if it were a decree.
Thus, it is a deemed decree. If a Court declines to 
adjudicate on the ground that it does not have jurisdiction, 
the said order cannot earn the status of a decree. If an 
executing court only expresses its inability to adjudicate 
by stating that it lacks jurisdiction, then the status of the 
order has to be different. (...)”
(Emphasis supplied)
48.	 A conjoint reading of the relevant provisions and the principles laid 
down by this Court makes it clear that in execution of decree for 
possession of immovable property, the executing court delivers actual 
physical possession of the decretal land to the decree holder. Rule 
35 confers jurisdiction on the executing Court to remove any person, 
who is bound by the decree and who refuses to vacate the property. 
The words “any person who is bound by the decree”, clearly mandate 
that removal can only be of a person who is bound by the decree. 
Rules 97 to 101 deal with situation when execution is obstructed or 
resisted by “any person” claiming right, title or interest in the property. 
The words “any person” include even a stranger to a decree resisting 
the decree of possession as not being bound by a decree or by 
claiming independent right, title or interest to the property.
49.	 Thus, Rule 97 not only provides remedy to a decree holder in 
obtaining possession of an immovable property but also to a stranger 
who obstructs or resists delivery of possession of the property by 
claiming derivative title from the judgment debtor or independent 
right, title or interest in the decretal property. Whereas, Rule 99 gives 
right to a third party claiming right, title or interest in the property to 
seek restoration of the decretal property. Suffice it to say that the 
remedy under Rule 99 is available when a person claiming right to 
the decretal property is already dispossessed.
50.	 Rule 101 enjoins upon the executing Court dealing with application 
under Rule 97 or 99 to determine all questions including questions 
relating to right, title or interest in the property, arising between 
the parties and relevant to the adjudication of the application. As 
held by this Court in Silverline Forum (supra) the question that 
578
the executing court is obliged to determine under Rule 101 must 
possess to adjuncts viz. (i) that such question should have legally 
arisen between the parties and (ii) such question must be relevant 
for consideration and determination between the parties. Upon 
adjudication of such questions, the executing court is under an 
obligation to pass appropriate order as contemplated under Rule 98 
or 100, as the case may be. When eventually such order is passed, 
it would be treated as decree and no separate Suit would lie against 
such order. It therefore follows that the only remedy is to prefer an 
appeal before the appropriate court against such deemed decree.
(iii)	 Section 47 of the CPC vis-à-vis Order XXI Rule 97 of the CPC
51.	 Under Section 47 of the CPC, questions arising between the parties 
to the suit relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the 
decree are covered whereas under Order XXI, Rule 97 read with 
rule 101 of the CPC, questions including those relating to right, 
title or interest in the property arising between the parties to the 
proceeding on an application under Rule 97 or Rule 99 of Order 
XXI are to be determined by the executing court. The language of 
Rule 97 provides that where the holder of a decree for possession 
of immovable property is resisted or obstructed by any person in 
obtaining possession of the property, he may make an application 
to the court complaining of such resistance or obstruction. The 
language used is “obstructed by any person”. It may be by the 
judgment-debtor or by a third person. Sub-rule (2) of the said Rule 
97 further provides that where an application is made under sub-
rule (1), the court shall proceed to adjudicate upon the application 
in accordance with the provisions thereunder contained. Sub-rule 
(2) of Rule 98 of Order XXI, further provides that where upon such 
determination, the Court is satisfied that the resistance or obstruction 
was occasioned without any just cause by the judgment-debtor or by 
some other person at his instigation or on his behalf, he shall direct 
that the applicant be put into, possession of the property. Rule 101 
of Order XXI provides as under:
“101. Question to be determined:-
All questions (including questions relating to right, title or 
interest in the property) arising between the parties to a 
proceeding on an application under rule 97 or rule 99 or 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
579
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
their representatives, and relevant to the adjudication of 
the application, shall be determined by the Court dealing 
with the application and not by a separate suit and for 
this purpose, the Court shall, notwithstanding anything 
to the contrary contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, be deemed to have jurisdiction to decide 
such questions.”
52.	 Thus the cumulative effect of all these rights read together is that if an 
application under Order XXI, Rule 97 is made, then its determination 
will be under Rule 101 and then Rule 103 further provides that 
where any application has been adjudicated upon under Rules 98 
or 100, the order made thereon shall have the same force and will 
be subject to the same conditions as to an appeal or otherwise as if 
it were a decree. Under Section 47 of the CPC all questions relating 
to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree, have to 
be determined by the executing court whereas under Rule 101 all 
questions including question relating to right, title or interest in the 
property arising between the parties to the proceedings have to be 
determined by the executing court. Section 47 is a general provision 
whereas Order XXI Rules 97 and 101 deal with a specific situation. 
Moreover, Section 47 deals with executions of all kinds of decrees 
whereas Order XXI, Rules 97 and 101 deal only with execution 
of decree for possession. Apart from that, earlier, i.e., prior to the 
amendment, every order falling under Section 47 was appealable 
(as the terms ‘decree” included the order under Section 47 of the 
CPC) whereas now only certain orders as provided for under Order 
XXI have been made appealable.
53.	 In such circumstances referred to above the application of the 
respondents No. 1 and 2 under Section 47 of the CPC bearing R.E.A. 
No. 163 of 2011 was in substance an application for determination 
of their possessory rights under Order XXI Rule 97. 
54.	 This Court in Bhanwar Lal v. Satyanarain, reported in (1995) 1 
SCC 6, has held that even an application filed under Section 47 
would be treated as an application under Order XXI Rule 97 and an 
adjudication is required to be conducted under Rule 98. Dispossession 
of the applicant from the property is not a condition for declining to 
entertain the application. The relevant portion of the judgment is 
reproduced below:
580
“5. The procedure has been provided in Rules 98 to 
103. We are not, at present, concerned with the question 
relating to the procedure to be followed and question 
to be determined under Order 21, Rules 98 to 102. A 
reading of Order 21, Rule 97 CPC clearly envisages 
that “any person” even including the judgment-debtor 
irrespective whether he claims derivative title from 
the judgment-debtor or set up his own right, title or 
interest dehors the judgment-debtor and he resists 
execution of a decree, then the court in addition to 
the power under Rule 35(3) has been empowered to 
conduct an enquiry whether the obstruction by that 
person in obtaining possession of immovable property 
was legal or not. The decree-holder gets a right under 
Rule 97 to make an application against third parties to 
have his obstruction removed and an enquiry thereon 
could be done. Each occasion of obstruction or resistance 
furnishes a cause of action to the decree-holder to make 
an application for removal of the obstruction or resistance 
by such person.
6. When the appellant had made the application on 25-
5-1979 against Satyanarain, in law it must be only the 
application made under Order 21, Rule 97(1) of CPC. The 
executing court, obviously, was in error in directing to 
make a fresh application. It is the duty of the executing 
court to consider the averments in the petition and 
consider the scope of the applicability of the relevant 
rule. On technical ground the executing court dismissed 
the second application on limitation and also the third 
application, on the ground of res judicata which the High 
Court has in the revisions now upheld. The procedure is 
the handmaid of substantive justice but in this case it has 
ruled the roost.
7. In the above view we have taken, the High Court has 
committed grievous error of jurisdiction and also patent 
illegality in treating the application filed by the appellant 
as barred by limitation and the third one on res judicata. 
Once the application, dated 25-5-1979 was made, the 
Court should have treated it to be one filed under 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
581
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
Order 21, Rule 97(1) CPC. The question of res judicata 
for filing the second and third applications does not arise. 
Under these circumstances the appellate court, though for 
different reasons was justified in directing an enquiry to 
be conducted for removal of the obstruction or resistance 
caused by Satyanarain under Order 21 Rules 35(3) and 
97(2) and Order 21, Rules 101 and 102 of CPC.”
(Emphasis supplied)
55.	 Before we proceed further, we must look into some part of the 
reasonings of the Executing Court as well as the High Court. 
56.	 The Executing Court in its order dated 12.08.2011 observed as under: 
“1. The petition is filed by the petitioners against the 
respondents under Section 47 CPC stating that they are 
in possession of the suit properties; that their objections 
should be enquired into and that the execution petition 
should be dismissed.
2. Gist of the Petition:
The petitioners are defendants, in O.S.No.514/83. It was 
decided against the petitioners. The petitioners are not 
aware of anything that has happened after the judgement 
dated 2.4.86. On 20.2.08 the Court Amin, Respondents, 
the Village Administrative Officers and few others came 
to the suit property, tried to vacate the petitioners and 
take possession. In E.P.No.237/04, the petitioners were 
not served with any notice. When they approached their 
Advocate and stated the details, he told that the E.P. was 
filed against Ramanujam and Jagadeesan.
Thereafter, the petitioners have filed this petition of objection. 
The respondents have filed R.E.P.No.237/04 praying for 
execution of the Sale Deed for the suit property. The 
petitioners are added for namesake and no notice is served 
upon the petitioners. Having impleaded these petitioners in 
the execution petition, not sending notice to them is legally 
unsustainable. The respondents have filed E.P.No.244/05 
adding the petitioners as parties. But notice is not sent to 
the petitioners. The E.P. was closed as not pressed.
582
On the basis of C.R.P.No.2032/05, E.P.No.237 /04 is taken 
on file. Vihen the Revision is pending before the High 
Court, the respondents have filed an execution petition. 
The respondents have not approached the court with clean 
hands. Even after E.P.No.237 /04 is taken on file, no notice 
was sent to the petitioners. A sale deed dated 17.8.2007 
was executed on behalf of the petitioners also. Thereafter, 
another deed was written on 25.1.08 by removing the 
names of the petitioners. The sale deed will not bind the 
petitioners. To show that the suit properties are in the 
possession and enjoyment of the petitioners from 1967 till 
date, the Adangal register is filed. The petitioners will be 
put to irreparable loss if delivery is ordered. The petition 
is to be allowed.
3. The gist of the Counter Statement filed by the 7th 
respondent adopted by the respondents 1 to 6 and 8 is 
as follows:
The petition filed by the petitioners is not maintainable. 
The petitioners are parties to O.S.No.514/83 and also the 
subsequent proceedings thereafter. The petitioners are 
the 1st defendant Ramanujam’s sister’s sons. The 1st 
petitioners filed a suit in O.S.No.1384/1980 against Ayyavu 
Udayar, Ramanujam and others for permanent injunction. 
In the said suit, Ramanujam objected the claim of the 
petitioners and the suit was dismissed on 29.7.1982. As 
the petitioners were continuously troubling the father of 
the respondents, they were added as defendants 3 and 
4 in the suit O.S.No.514/83. The defendants 1 and 2 filed 
an appeal A.S.No.469/86 before the High Court adding 
the petitioners also as parties. After the death of Ayyavu 
Udayar, these respondents were added as respondents 4 
to 11 therein. On 29.9.2000, the column 6 of the decree 
in O.S.No.514/83 was removed and the appeal was 
dismissed. During the pendency of the appeal, the 1st 
respondent and his son entered into an agreement with 
Arivazhagan to sell the property. 
Against the dismissal of the appeal, the defendants 1 and 
2 filed LP.A. No.62/2001 against the petitioners and the 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
583
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
respondents. As per the Order in LPA, the respondents 
deposited a further sum of Rs.67,000/- before the Court 
on 19.4.04. During the pendency of E.P.No.237/04, the 
defendants 1 & 2 filed SLP No.18184/2004 before the 
Supreme Court against the petitioners and the legal heirs 
of Ayyavu Udayar. when a Memo was filed before this 
Court about the pendency of the SLP, this Court dismissed 
the E.P. After the High Court Order, the execution petition 
237 / 04 was taken on file, on endorsement E.P.No.244/05 
was dismissed as not pressed. The LPA was dismissed 
on 20.1.2006. The defendants 1 & 2 filed a review 
petition No.359/06 and the same was dismissed on 
18.4.06. The petitioners are aware of all the proceedings 
upto the Supreme Court arid they were also parties in 
the proceedings. The 1st petitioner Rajamani entered 
into an agreement with one P.R. Jayakumar, Advocate. 
O.S.No.197/87 is now pending as 327/10. The petitioners 
do not have rights over the suit properties. They do not 
have any rights w object delivery of possession. The 
petitioners are not in possession of title suit properties. 
The petition is to be dismissed.
4. Whether the petition is bound to be allowed?
5. On the side of the petitioners, PW-1 was examined 
and Exhibits P-1 to P-11 were marked. On the side of 
the respondents, R- 1 was examined and Exhibits R-1 to 
R-16 were marked.
6. ORDER:
Both the sides argued their case on the basis of the 
petition and the reply filed by them. The case records were 
considered. Stating that the petitioners are in possession 
of the suit properties of O.S.No.514/83, on the side of the 
petitioners, the 2nd petitioner Ethirajulu was examined as 
PW-1 and 11 documents were marked. The order passed 
by the Tahsildar and RDO and six cultivation accounts 
are there. 
On the side of the respondents, the Jill respondent was 
examined as RW-1and16 documents were marked.
584
On the side of the petitioners, it was argued that the 
petitioners are in possession and enjoyment of the suit 
properties and that Ramanujam & Jagadeesan are not 
in possession of the same. The petitioners have filed the 
cultivation account and the orders passed by the orders 
passed by the RDO and stated that they are in possession 
of the properties. The documents filed by the petitioners 
confirm the same. The petitioners have also stated that 
they are in possession of the properties from 1967. 
On the side of the respondents, the arguments by the 
petitioners were vehemently opposed and it was stated 
that the petitioners do not have any right to object and 
oppose the delivery of possession. The Ld. Counsel 
for the petitioners argued that Ihe respondents have 
filed two execution petitions viz., E.P.No.237 /04 and 
E.P.No.244/05. On perusal of the court records, it is seen 
that the respondents filed E.P.No.237 /04 in 2004, got 
the sale deed and for delivery of possession of property 
made prayer only against Ramanujam and Jagadeesan. 
and that the petitioners are simply added as parties 
therein. When Ramanujam and Jagadeesan filed a 
Memo before this Court that SLP is pending, E.P.No.237 
/04 was dismissed by this court. Challenging that order, 
the respondents filed Revision Petition for restoration of 
E.P.No.237 /04. In the meantime, the respondents filed 
the second execution petition E.P.No.244/05 against 
Ramanujam and Jagadeesan. A prayer which is made 
in E.P.No.237 /04 is also made in the second execution 
petition. In both the petitions, even though the names of 
Rajamani and Ethirajulu are stated, the prayer is made 
only against Ramanujam and Jagadeesan alone. The 
Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents has also 
accepted the same. A perusal of the records also show 
that it is true that no relief is claimed against the petitioners 
in column 9 of the E.P. and that prayer is made in column 
9 only against Ramanujam and Jagadeesan as accepted 
by the Senior Advocate.
The Learned Counsel for the petitioners argued that no 
notice was sent to the petitioners herein in the E.P. and that 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
585
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
notice was sent only to Ramanujam and Jagadeesan. A 
perusal of the court records also shows that notice is sent 
from the court in the execution petition only to Ramanujam 
and Jagadeesan. Even though the petitioners are shown 
as respondents 3 & 4 in the execution petition, no notice 
was sent to them, as no prayer was made against them. 
The Senior Advocate for foe respondents has not denied 
the same. In E.P. No.237/04, the court has executed the 
sale deed on behalf of Ramanujam, Jagadeesan, Ethirajulu 
and Rajamani. Challenging the said order, Ramanujam and 
Jagadeesan filed a revision before the Hon’ble High Court. 
The Hon’ble High Court has also directed that the names 
of Rajamani and Ethirajulu may be removed and this court 
has also executed a rectification deed removing the names 
of the petitioners. The RW-1 has also accepted this fact 
in the cross examination. The 1st respondent has also 
accepted in the cross examination that Ramanujam and 
Jagadeesan filed C.R.P. before the High Court stating that 
it is not proper to execute the sale deed on behalf of all the 
4 persons; that it is ordered by the High Court to remove 
the names of Rajamani and Ethirajulu and execute the sale 
deed and that as the names of Rajamani and Ethirajulu are 
removed, the sale deed is not binding so far as Rajamani 
and Ethirajulu are concerned. It is accepted on the side of 
the respondents that the order and the sale deed will not 
bind the petitioners. During the course of the course of 
the argument by both sides, it was stated that O.S.No.52/ 
11 is pending before this court; that O.S.No.608/08 was 
filed before the District Munsif Court and that on transfer, 
the same is pending as O.S.No.52/ 11. It is accepted by 
the respondents that a suit for partition in respect of 3.60 
acres, which is one item of the suit property. So it is clear 
that the respondents have filed claiming half share in the 
undivided 3 acres and 60 cents.
When PW-1 was cross-examined on the side of the 
respondents, questions were asked about O.S.No.326/ 
10, 327/10 and 328/10. No details were asked for about 
O.S.No.52/ 11. The petitioners by oral and documentary 
evidences have proved that they are in possession of the 
586
suit properties. The Senior Advocate on the side of the 
respondents has also admitted that when delivery was 
to be taken, the petitioners were m possession and that 
prevented the effecting of delivery, the petitioners stated 
that they will set fire to themselves by pouring kerosene. 
On the side of the respondents, no favourable answers 
were obtained by addressing detailed questions to PW-1. 
On perusal of foe records, it is seen that the petitioners 
were added in all foe proceedings only nominally and no 
specific prayer is made in the execution petition against 
the petitioners. While cross-examining PW 1 on the side 
of the respondents, suggestion was made that he is giving 
false evidence only to prevent the effecting of delivery and 
to drag on the proceedings and the PW-1 has denied the 
same. In RW 1’s evidence, it is seen that the High Court 
has removed the names of Rajamani and Ethirajulu and 
as Rajamani and Ethirajulu are nominally added, it will not 
affect their rights. The judgement in O.S.No.514/83 win 
not bind the petitioners. In E.P. also, no Bhatta was paid 
for sending notice to the petitioners. In E.P.No.237/04 and 
E.P.No.214/05, relief is claimed in column 9 only against 
Ramanujam and Jagadeesan. 
On the side of the respondents, it is proved that the 
possession of the suit property is wit.li Ramanujam 
and Jagadeesan. It is not stated in their reply that the 
possession of the suit property is with Ramanujam and 
Jagadeesan. No independent witness was examined to 
show that Rajamani and Ethirajulu are not in possession 
and that Ramanujam and Jagadeesan are in possession of 
the suit property. In both the execution petitions, no prayer 
is made against the petitioners for delivery of possession. 
The petitioners have proved that they are in possession. 
The respondents have not produced the records relating 
to the proceedings in prior litigations. It is not proved that 
the possession of the property is with Ramanujam and 
Jagadeesan. As the respondents have not asked for any 
prayer in the execution petition against the petitioners 
herein to prove that the petitioners are in possession, 
as no acceptable reason is stated for not making any 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
587
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
prayer against foe petitioners, which affects the case of 
the respondents, when the petitioners have proved their 
possessory rights over the suit properties and also as the 
respondents can take possession only after taking legal 
steps/ proceedings and also as the objections raised by 
the petitioners are acceptable, this court holds that in the 
interest of justice, the petition is to be allowed.”
57.	 Thus, according to the Executing Court, although the respondent 
nos. 1 and 2 herein were impleaded as parties in the execution 
petition filed by the appellants herein yet no notice was sent to them 
as there was no prayer made against them. Secondly, according to 
the Executing Court the respondent nos. 1 and 2 have been able to 
establish that they are in possession of the suit properties. In such 
circumstances, the objections raised by the respondent Nos. 1 and 
2 herein under Section 47 of the CPC were upheld. 
58.	 The High Court while affirming the order passed by the Executing 
Court proceeded altogether on a different footing. The High Court 
held as under: 
“25. Even after knowing the possession of the respondents 
3 and 4 / defendants, in the earlier occasion, after so many 
years, the decree holders, purposely did not ask the Court 
to send notice to respondents 3 and 4 / defendants. In fact 
the decree has also been passed against the respondents 
3 and 4 / defendants, in which the respondents 3 and 4 
/defendants, are directed to hand over possession to the 
decree holders. Only taking into consideration of the same, 
the learned First Additional Subordinate Judge, Salem, 
had allowed the REA No. 163 of 2011 vi de order dated 
12.08.2011, by holding that since, no notice is served to 
respondents 3 and 4/ defendants, the Court cannot pass 
any order directing the respondents 3 and 4/ defendants, to 
deliver possession and thereby their right of possession, is 
no way effected. Therefore, this Court is of the considered 
view that the said proposition taken by the court below do 
not have any material irregularity. 
26. However, it is the duty of the Court below to dismiss 
the REP No.237 of 2004, after allowing the application filed 
in REA No. 163 of 2011 (47 CPC). But the learned First 
588
Additional Subordinate Judge, Salem, without following the 
consequential procedure, allowed the revision petitioners/
decree holders to file applications for amending the 
execution petition. Since the right of the respondents 3 
and 4/ defendants are determined in REA No. 163 of 2011, 
the question of subsequent amendment in the same EP 
(REP No.237 of 2004) in Column No. 10 virtually does 
not arise on the date. So far as respondents 3 and 4 are 
concerned, no execution petition was pending. Under 
the said circumstances, amendment petitions are not 
maintainable. Therefore, this Court is of the firm view that 
the amendment applications filed in REA Nos. 14 of 2012 
and 145 of 2013, are not maintainable in liminie.
27.The decree holders should have taken steps to amend 
the execution petition atleast after seeing the defence set 
up by the respondents 3 and 4/defendants in the REA No. 
163 of 2011. But they have not taken any steps to amend 
the execution petition till the disposal of application filed 
under Section 47 CPC. More than that, the decree holder / 
revision petitioners, after knowing the result of REA No. 163 
of 2011 in the year 2011, till 2015 they have not preferred 
any appeal against the order passed in the petition filed 
under Section 47 CPC. The reason for not filing the appeal 
or revision, immediately, is not explained on the side of the 
revision petitioners/decree holders. Though the procedure 
is meant to advance cause of justice, it is for the litigants 
to watch the proceedings, then and there, without any 
delay, with care and vigil. 
28. Therefore, in the light, of the above discussions, this 
Court is of the opinion that the impugned order passed in 
the petition filed under Section 47 CPC is not having any 
material irregularity and thereby, the order dated 12.08.2011 
made in REA No.163 of 2011 in REP No.237 of 2004 in 
OS No.514 of 1983, is sustained and CRP No.4311 of 
2011, is dismissed. 
29. Further, as already observed, after allowing the 
application filed under Section 47 CPC, the Execution 
Petition has to be closed. But for the reasons best known, 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
589
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
the execution petition filed by the revision petitioners/ 
decree holders was kept alive and thereafter, the 
revision petitioners/ decree holders took the applications 
for amendment. In fact, the same is not maintainable. 
Therefore, the orders dated 24.04.2015 made in REA 
Nos.14 of 2012 and 145 of 2013 in REP No.237 of 2004 in 
OS No.514 of 1983, are also sustained and CRP Nos.2150 
& 2151 of 2015, are dismissed. No costs. Consequently, 
the connected Miscellaneous Petitions are closed.”
59.	 It appears that the Courts below proceeded absolutely on a wrong 
footing. What the courts below should have considered is the simple 
fact whether the obstruction at the end of the respondent nos. 1 
and 2 of the execution of the decree of specific performance and 
possession of the suit property could be said to be bona fide and 
genuine. In other words, the consideration at the end of both the 
courts should have been whether the respondent nos. 1 and 2 herein 
being nephews of the original venders are acting in collusion with 
each other only with a view to frustrate and defeat the decree. 
60.	 We are of the view that the Courts below failed to consider the 
following: 
a.	
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively are nephews of the 
vendors and claim to have come into possession of the suit 
property in the year 1983 when the suit was first instituted by 
the appellants before the ASJ. They were impleaded in the 
original suit as the defendant Nos. 3 and 4 respectively.
b.	
The decree in favour of the appellants granting specific 
performance with possession was affirmed by the High Court 
on 19.03.2004 and the SLP against the order of the High Court 
stood dismissed on 20.01.2006. The respondent Nos. 1 and 
2 respectively chose not to contest the original suit before the 
ASJ. They did not appear even before the High Court and this 
Court in the appeals filed by the vendors (judgment debtors).
c.	
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were also impleaded in the 
execution petition bearing R.E.P. No. 237 of 2004 and the 
order of the High Court dated 21.02.2006 indicates that they 
had appeared through their advocate and were aware about 
the said execution petition. 
590
d.	
The Executing Court executed the sale deed on 17.08.2007 
and ordered for delivery of possession of the suit property to 
the appellants. When such order was sought to be effected by 
the appellants along with the Village Administrative Officer, the 
respondent no. 1 obstructed the delivery of possession.
e.	
Thereafter, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively filed an 
execution application R.E.A. No. 163 of 2011 on 12.03.2008 
alleging fraud on the part of the appellants saying that they were 
not aware about the execution proceedings. At this stage, the 
respondent no. 2 brought onto the record for the first time that 
he along with the respondent no. 1 were cultivating the land 
constituting the suit property.
f.	
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively, after seven months 
i.e. on 18.10.2008 filed a petition before the revenue authorities 
for inclusion of their names in the cultivation account of the suit 
property and prayed that the same be done retrospectively from 
the year 1974. Though, the revenue authorities only allowed 
for inclusion of their names from 2008 onwards yet they were 
granted certificate that they were in possession of the suit 
property from 1974 onwards. Such certificate was provided to 
them on the basis of the “no objection” given by the vendors 
(judgment debtors) as they were considered to be title holders of 
the said property. From the facts on record, it can be discerned 
that the revenue authorities were not made aware of the sale 
deed executed in favour of the appellants herein and that the 
title of the suit property stood transferred to them. 
61.	 It further appears that the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively, 
claiming to be cultivating tenants, had contended before the courts 
below that the civil court lacked jurisdiction to adjudicate on matters 
pertaining to possession of the suit property and eviction therefrom. 
The respondents submitted that the decree passed in the original 
suit was a nullity and therefore, the validity of the decree could be 
challenged even during the execution proceedings. 
62.	 A harmonious reading of Section 47 with Order XXI Rule 101 
implies that questions relating to right, title or interest in a decretal 
property must be related to the execution, discharge or satisfaction 
of the decree. The import of such a reading of the provisions is that 
only matters arising subsequent to the passing of the decree can 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
591
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
be determined by an executing court under Section 47 and Order 
XXI Rule 101. Such reasoning is reinforced by the decisions of this 
Court in C.F. Angadi v. Y.S. Hirannayya reported in (1972) 1 SCC 
191 and Vasudev Dhanjibhai Modi v. Rajabhai Abdul Rehman 
reported in (1970) 1 SCC 670, wherein it has been held that while 
determining a question under Section 47, an executing court cannot 
go behind the decree and question the correctness of the same.
63.	 What flows from the position of law, as afore stated, is that the issues 
that ought to have been raised by the parties during the adjudication 
of the original suit cannot be determined by the executing court as 
such adjudication may undermine the decree itself. This Court in 
Rahul S. Shah v. Jinendra Kumar Gandhi reported in (2021) 6 
SCC 418 has held that the benefit of Section 47 cannot be availed to 
conduct a retrial causing failure of realisation of fruits of the decree. 
The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced below:
“24. In respect of execution of a decree, Section 47 CPC 
contemplates adjudication of limited nature of issues 
relating to execution i.e. discharge or satisfaction of the 
decree and is aligned with the consequential provisions 
of Order 21 CPC. Section 47 is intended to prevent 
multiplicity of suits. It simply lays down the procedure 
and the form whereby the court reaches a decision. For 
the applicability of the section, two essential requisites 
have to be kept in mind. Firstly, the question must be 
the one arising between the parties and secondly, the 
dispute relates to the execution, discharge or satisfaction 
of the decree. Thus, the objective of Section 47 is to 
prevent unwanted litigation and dispose of all objections 
as expeditiously as possible.
25. These provisions contemplate that for execution 
of decrees, executing court must not go beyond the 
decree. However, there is steady rise of proceedings 
akin to a retrial at the time of execution causing failure 
of realisation of fruits of decree and relief which the 
party seeks from the courts despite there being a 
decree in their favour. Experience has shown that 
various objections are filed before the executing court 
and the decree-holder is deprived of the fruits of the 
592
litigation and the judgment-debtor, in abuse of process 
of law, is allowed to benefit from the subject-matter 
which he is otherwise not entitled to.
26. The general practice prevailing in the subordinate 
courts is that invariably in all execution applications, the 
courts first issue show-cause notice asking the judgment-
debtor as to why the decree should not be executed as is 
given under Order 21 Rule 22 for certain class of cases. 
However, this is often misconstrued as the beginning of 
a new trial. For example, the judgment-debtor sometimes 
misuses the provisions of Order 21 Rule 2 and Order 21 
Rule 11 to set up an oral plea, which invariably leaves no 
option with the court but to record oral evidence which 
may be frivolous. This drags the execution proceedings 
indefinitely.
27. This is antithesis to the scheme of the Civil 
Procedure Code, which stipulates that in civil suit, all 
questions and issues that may arise, must be decided 
in one and the same trial. Order 1 and Order 2 which 
relate to parties to suits and frame of suits with the object 
of avoiding multiplicity of proceedings, provides for joinder 
of parties and joinder of cause of action so that common 
questions of law and facts could be decided at one go.”
(Emphasis supplied)
64.	 In the present case, the appellants have pleaded in their plaint that 
the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 respectively were impleaded therein as 
defendants as they were in possession of the suit property. However, 
the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 chose not to contest the suit despite 
being aware of the prayer of the appellant for delivery of possession 
of the suit properties. They could have filed a joint written statement 
stating that they are cultivating tenants at the stage of the original 
suit itself, but rather raised the said issue in the form of objections 
at the stage of execution.
65.	 Furthermore, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 failed to produce any 
documentary evidence as regards their claim of being cultivating 
tenants, even at the stage of their Section 47 application. Instead, 
they filed for registration of their names in the cultivation account of 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
593
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
the suit property only in 2008 and prayed for retrospective inclusion 
of their names from 1974. While the Revenue authorities declined 
the retrospective inclusion of the respondents’ names as cultivating 
tenants from 1974, it allowed for their inclusion in the cultivation 
account of the suit property starting from 2008 onwards. The revenue 
authorities also ordered for grant of certificate to the respondent Nos. 1 
and 2 certifying that they were in possession of the suit property from 
1974 on the strength of the “no objection” provided by the vendors. 
66.	 The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are asserting their independent right 
to remain in possession of the suit land and consequent protection 
under the Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants’ Protection Act, 1955, 
owing to their status of being cultivating tenants granted in 2008 by 
the Revenue authorities.
67.	 It is worthwhile to revisit the facts that the High Court and this Court 
had affirmed the decree of specific performance with possession 
in favour of the appellants in the year 2004 and 2006 respectively. 
Subsequently, the sale deed was executed by the Executing Court 
on 17.08.2007 thereby transferring title of the suit property to the 
appellants. Despite such confirmation of the decree and transfer of title 
in favour of the appellants, it is incomprehensible why a notice was 
sent to the vendors by the revenue authorities in 2008. Further, the 
vendors gave “no objection” to the grant of certificate of possession 
to the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 from 1974 despite not having any 
authority to do so in light of the sale deed dated 17.08.2007. 
68.	 In our considered view, the aforesaid by no stretch of imagination can 
be construed to be a legal right of possession existing independently 
from the title of the vendors which has now stood transferred to the 
appellants. It is nothing but a case of apparent collusion between the 
vendors and the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to deprive the appellants 
from availing the fruits of the decree in their favour.
69.	 Even otherwise, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 cannot claim protection 
of the special legislation of 1955 for the period during which they 
were not registered as tenants cultivating the suit properties. In our 
view, the certificate that they are in possession of the suit properties 
since 1974 does not come to their aid. We say so, because the said 
certificate does not establish any independent right of possession in 
favour of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2. Further, the certificate itself 
appears to have been obtained in collusion with the vendors who 
594
at the time of giving “no objection” had ceased to be the owners of 
the suit property.
70.	 In such circumstances referred to above, we find it extremely difficult 
to accept that the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are bona fide cultivating 
tenants of the suit property and thus, the determination of the question 
of them being in possession of the same must necessarily go against 
them and in favour of the appellants. Therefore, there is no question 
of deciding the validity of the decree on the ground of being a nullity 
due to lack of jurisdiction of the civil court to evict cultivating tenants.
71.	 In such circumstances referred to above, we have reached the 
conclusion that the High Court committed an egregious error in 
passing the impugned order. We must now ensure that the appellants 
are able to reap the fruits of the decree. We are also of the view that 
the rejection by the High Court of the amendments to the execution 
petition filed by the appellants, was erroneous and deserves to be 
set aside.
72.	 Before we close this matter, we firmly believe that we should say 
something as regards the long and inordinate delay at the end of the 
Executing Courts across the country in deciding execution petitions. 
73.	 It is worthwhile to revisit the observations in Rahul S. Shah (supra) 
wherein this Court has provided guidelines and directions for conduct 
of execution proceedings. The relevant portion of the said judgment 
is reproduced below:
“42. All courts dealing with suits and execution proceedings 
shall mandatorily follow the below mentioned directions:
42.1. In suits relating to delivery of possession, the court 
must examine the parties to the suit under Order 10 in 
relation to third-party interest and further exercise the power 
under Order 11 Rule 14 asking parties to disclose and 
produce documents, upon oath, which are in possession 
of the parties including declaration pertaining to third-party 
interest in such properties.
42.2. In appropriate cases, where the possession is not in 
dispute and not a question of fact for adjudication before 
the court, the court may appoint Commissioner to assess 
the accurate description and status of the property.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
595
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
42.3. After examination of parties under Order 10 or 
production of documents under Order 11 or receipt of 
Commission report, the court must add all necessary 
or proper parties to the suit, so as to avoid multiplicity 
of proceedings and also make such joinder of cause of 
action in the same suit.
42.4. Under Order 40 Rule 1 CPC, a Court Receiver can be 
appointed to monitor the status of the property in question 
as custodia legis for proper adjudication of the matter.
42.5. The court must, before passing the decree, 
pertaining to delivery of possession of a property 
ensure that the decree is unambiguous so as to not 
only contain clear description of the property but also 
having regard to the status of the property.
42.6. In a money suit, the court must invariably resort to 
Order 21 Rule 11, ensuring immediate execution of decree 
for payment of money on oral application.
42.7. In a suit for payment of money, before settlement 
of issues, the defendant may be required to disclose his 
assets on oath, to the extent that he is being made liable 
in a suit. The court may further, at any stage, in appropriate 
cases during the pendency of suit, using powers under 
Section 151 CPC, demand security to ensure satisfaction 
of any decree.
42.8. The court exercising jurisdiction under Section 
47 or under Order 21 CPC, must not issue notice 
on an application of third party claiming rights in 
a mechanical manner. Further, the court should 
refrain from entertaining any such application(s) 
that has already been considered by the court while 
adjudicating the suit or which raises any such 
issue which otherwise could have been raised and 
determined during adjudication of suit if due diligence 
was exercised by the applicant.
42.9. The court should allow taking of evidence during 
the execution proceedings only in exceptional and rare 
cases where the question of fact could not be decided by 
596
resorting to any other expeditious method like appointment 
of Commissioner or calling for electronic materials including 
photographs or video with affidavits.
42.10. The court must in appropriate cases where it 
finds the objection or resistance or claim to be frivolous 
or mala fide, resort to sub-rule (2) of Rule 98 of Order 
21 as well as grant compensatory costs in accordance 
with Section 35-A.
42.11. Under Section 60 CPC the term “… in name of the 
judgment-debtor or by another person in trust for him or 
on his behalf” should be read liberally to incorporate any 
other person from whom he may have the ability to derive 
share, profit or property.
42.12. The executing court must dispose of the 
execution proceedings within six months from the date 
of filing, which may be extended only by recording 
reasons in writing for such delay.
42.13. The executing court may on satisfaction of the fact 
that it is not possible to execute the decree without police 
assistance, direct the police station concerned to provide 
police assistance to such officials who are working towards 
execution of the decree. Further, in case an offence against 
the public servant while discharging his duties is brought 
to the knowledge of the court, the same must be dealt 
with stringently in accordance with law.
42.14. The Judicial Academies must prepare manuals and 
ensure continuous training through appropriate mediums to 
the court personnel/staff executing the warrants, carrying 
out attachment and sale and any other official duties for 
executing orders issued by the executing courts.”
(Emphasis supplied)
74.	 The mandatory direction contained in Para 42.12 of Rahul S. Shah 
(supra) requiring the execution proceedings to be completed within 
six months from the date of filing, has been reiterated by this Court 
in its order in Bhoj Raj Garg v. Goyal Education and Welfare 
Society & Ors., Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 19654 of 2022. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
597
Periyammal (Dead) Through LRs & Ors. v. V. Rajamani & Anr. Etc.
75.	 In view of the aforesaid, we direct all the High Courts across the 
country to call for the necessary information from their respective 
district judiciary as regards pendency of the execution petitions. 
Once the data is collected by each of the High Courts, the High 
Courts shall thereafter proceed to issue an administrative order or 
circular, directing their respective district judiciary to ensure that the 
execution petitions pending in various courts shall be decided and 
disposed of within a period of six months without fail otherwise the 
concerned presiding officer would be answerable to the High Court 
on its administrative side. Once the entire data along with the figures 
of pendency and disposal thereafter, is collected by all the High 
Courts, the same shall be forwarded to the Registry of this Court 
with individual reports. 
76.	 Registry is directed to forward one copy each of this judgment to all 
the High Courts at the earliest. 
77.	 The Registry shall notify this matter once again after seven months 
only for the purpose of reporting compliance of the directions issued 
by us referred to above. 
F.	
CONCLUSION
78.	 In the result, the appeals succeed and are hereby allowed. The 
impugned judgment passed by the High Court is hereby set aside. 
The order passed by the Executing Court is also hereby set aside. 
79.	 The Executing Court shall now proceed to ensure that vacant and 
peaceful possession of the suit property is handed over to the 
appellants in their capacity as decree holders and if necessary, with 
the aid of police. This exercise shall be completed within a period 
of two months from today without fail.
80.	 Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed. 
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey