[2025] 1 S.C.R. 158 : 2025 INSC 22
Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. & Anr. 
v. 
Mathias Oram & Ors.
(Miscellaneous Application No. 2662/2023 
In 
M.A. No. 231/2019 
In 
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 6933 of 2007)
03 January 2025
[Bela M. Trivedi* and Satish Chandra Sharma, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the extension of the term of the Claims 
Commission, and determining the Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
benefits of the villages acquired by the appellant-MCL
Headnotes†
Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 
1957  – Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 
2013 – Compensation claim – Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
benefits – Determination, of land oustees of four acquired 
villages – Villages acquired by the appellant-MCL – Claims 
Commission appointed for determining the claim of 
compensation in respect of vast portions of lands acquired – 
Commission set up for carrying out the exercise for 14 
villages – Report submitted by the Commission in relation to 
the village Gopalpur – Recommendations approved and made 
it an order of the Court – Following the Gopalpur model, the 
Commission submitted further reports which were approved – 
Several applications moved by the MCL and land owners 
seeking a range of directions – By order dated 03.11.2022, 
this Court held that the Gopalpur Model for determining the 
compensation was applied in respect of 10 villages which 
reports were approved by the courts, and the issues stood 
finalized and there could be no re-determination, and this Court 
* Author
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
159
Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. & Anr. v. 
Mathias Oram & Ors.
would not entertain Miscellaneous Application – In regard to 
four villages-Tumulia, Jhupuranga, Ratansara, and Kirpsara, 
no award approved on the said date – However, Miscellaneous 
Applications filed – Directions sought as regards extension 
of time to finalise the report of village Ratansara by the Nodal 
Officer, Claims Commissioner; directions to Commission to 
prepare the PAF/PDF list determining R&R benefits of any or 
all four remaining villages out of 14 villages acquired by the 
MCL; and directions to direct the Commission to decide their 
cases at the earliest:
Held: No further order for extension of the term of the Commission 
can be passed – Directions as prayed for by the Committee to 
direct the Commission to prepare PAF/PDF list determining the 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement benefits of the four villages cannot 
be issued – Commission entertained the cases filed by the land 
oustees of whose reports have already been finalized and approved 
by this Court – Commission also travelled beyond the directions 
given by this Court by entertaining the issues raised by the villagers 
and land oustees of four villages with regard to Rehabilitation 
and Resettlement benefits – Only additional exercise which the 
Commission had to carry out was the differential payable after 
the re-determination in respect of all the elements-market value, 
solatium, and further interest – This Court clearly earmarked the 
task of the Commission and of the other authorities and given final 
directions which had to be followed – Commission appears to have 
entertained the issues with regard to the suitability of resettlement 
sites for shifting of the eligible land oustees – Commission should 
not have entertained any of these issues, when all the issues 
alluded and dealt with thoroughly by this Court vide order dated 
03.11.2022 – MCL already raised objections with regard to the 
method of calculation, the said issue was transferred to the High 
Court and is pending – High Court to decide the writ petition 
expeditiously – MCL to make payment towards the compensation 
immediately after the final judgment passed by the High Court. 
[Paras 15-26]
List of Acts
Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957; 
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.
160
List of Keywords
Compensation claim; Commission; Mahanadi Coalfields; 
Compensation to land oustees; Rehabilitation and resettlement 
benefits; Gopalpur Model . 
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Miscellaneous Application No. 
2662 of 2023
In
M.A. No. 231 of 2019
In
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 6933 of 2007
From the Judgment and Order dated 03.11.2022 of the Supreme 
Court of India in MA No. 231 of 2019
And
M.A. (D) No. 28318 of 2024 In M.A. No. 231 of 2019
In SLP(C) No. 6933 of 2007
With
Interlocutory Application Nos. 137789 of 2024 & 137791 of 2024
And
M.A. (D) No. 30630 of 2024 in SLP(C) No. 6933 of 2007
With
Interlocutory Application Nos. 148429 & 148427 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
K.M. Nataraj, A.S.G., Atmaram N.S. Nadkarni, Sr. Adv., Salvador 
Santosh Rebello, Raghav Sharma, Prateek Tanmay, Ms. Kritika, 
Jaskirat Pal Singh, Ms. Manisha Gupta, Ms. Arzu Paul, Ms. Deepti 
Arya, Rishikesh Haridas, Ms. Himanshi Nagpal, Ms. Pooja Gill, 
Anup Kumar, Amiya Kumar Behera, Ms. Pragya Choudhary, Ms. 
Shruti Singh, Mrs. Neha Jaiswal, Satyajit Mahanty, P Vamshi Rao, 
Abhishek Choudhury, Madhusudan Jena, Prashant Bhushan, 
Kamal Kishore, Ms. Kajal Giri, Tejaswi Kumar Pradhan, Manoranjan 
Paikaray, Ms. Anindita Pujari, Ms. Rohini Musa, Gurmeet Singh 
Makker, Ms. Priyanka Das, Abhishek Atrey, Sughosh Subramanyam, 
Pratyush Shrivastava, A. Venayagam Balan, Arvind Kumar Sharma, 
R. Chandrachud, Jogy Scaria, Shibashish Misra, Vishal Arun, 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
161
Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. & Anr. v. 
Mathias Oram & Ors.
Shankar Divate, Ashok Panigrahi, Ms. Geetanjali Das Krishnan, 
Mudit Sharma, Ms. Nandini Gidwaney, Satya Mitra, Rahul Shyam 
Bhandari, Ms. Neha Rathi, S. Verma, Aftab Ali Khan, S. K. 
Srivastava, Mansur Ali Khan, Gurjeet Singh, Rahat Ali Chaudhary, 
Ms. Mahetaba Asrar, Advs. for the appearing parties.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Bela M. Trivedi, J.
1.	
The captioned M.A. No. 2662 of 2023 in M.A. No. 231/2019 has 
been filed by the Secretary-cum-Administrative Nodal Officer, Claims 
Commission, Bhubaneswar seeking extension of time to finalise the 
report of village Ratansara.
2.	
The captioned M.A. (D) No.28318/2024 in M.A. No.231/2019 has 
been filed by the Applicant-Manikeswari Bisthapita Committee through 
its Secretary praying to direct the Commission to prepare the PAF/
PDF list determining R&R benefits of any or all four remaining 
Villages namely Tumulia, Jhupurunga, Kiripsira and Ratansara out 
of 14 villages acquired by the MCL in compliance of the order dated 
03.11.2022 passed by this Court in M.A. No. 231 of 2019.
3.	
The captioned M.A. (D) No.30630/2024 has been filed by the eight 
applicants praying to direct the Commission to decide their cases 
at the earliest.
4.	
It may be noted that the Claims Commission had submitted the 
status report showing the progress of the proceedings before it as on 
27.06.2024, pursuant to the order passed by this Court on 23.01.2024. 
Vide the said order dated 23.01.2024, this Court had extended the 
term of the Commission till 15.07.2024, after recording the statement 
of the Secretary of the Commission that the Commission shall finalise 
the claims in respect of Village Ratansara by June, 2024. This Court 
had also directed the Commission to submit the report with regard 
to the finalization of the claims in respect of the Village Ratansara 
on or before 01.07.2024. The Commission, therefore, has submitted 
the report dated 01.07.2024 updating the Court about the term of 
the Commission and the work pending with the Commission.
162
5.	
As per the Status Report submitted by the Claims Commission, the 
work pending before the Commission as on 27.06.2024 was as under: -
“(i) To dispose of 2836 (2581 as on 31st December, 2023 
+ 255 in 2024) Nos. of Civil Cases and 232 (228 + 4) 
Nos. of Misc.
Cases filed by land oustees of 10 villages pursuant to 
orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 15.07.2013 
and 10.07.2017.
(ii) To dispose of 24 (16+8) Nos. of cases pursuant to the 
direction of the High Court of Orissa issued in various 
Writ petitions.
(iii) To dispose of 194 (57+137) Nos. of cases filed by the 
villagers of Jhupurunga and Tumulia after finalization of 
the Report for substitution of legal heirs of awardees and 
correction of computer-generated mistakes.
(iv) To Certify suitability of Rehabilitation sites for shifting 
of eligible land oustees who are entitled to R&R benefits. 
Once the Rehabilitation site is ready, the Commission 
shall issue necessary certificate as directed by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court vide order dated 10.7.2017.
(v) Determination of R&R benefits of land oustees of 4 
acquired villages namely Jhupurunga, Tumulia, Kiripsira 
and Ratansara by the Commission subject to appropriate 
direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court to that effect.”
6.	
The Original Writ Petitioner i.e., Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCL) 
has filed a detailed reply to the Part-I report for Village Ratansara 
dated 27.06.2024 and to the progress status report dated 27.06.2024. 
Raising objections against the report of Village Ratansara dated 
27.06.2024 submitted by the Claims Commission, the MCL has stated 
that the Claims Commission had completely erred in its methodology 
of calculating the compensation for Village Ratansara and has also 
ignored the express directions of this Court given vide judgment 
dated 03.11.2022 passed in M.A. No. 231 of 2019 in SLP (C) No. 
6933 of 2007. According to the MCL, since the MCL had objected 
to the Commission’s methodology of calculation, this Court vide the 
order dated 10.10.2023 had transferred the issue to the High Court 
of Orissa. The W.P. (C) No. 39185 of 2023 preferred before the 
High Court in this regard is pending. It is further stated by the MCL 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
163
Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. & Anr. v. 
Mathias Oram & Ors.
that so far as the payment of compensation for the structures was 
concerned, the MCL has already made payment without prejudice 
to rights and contentions as regards the calculation method. 
7.	
As regards the other pending work shown by the Commission in its 
status report dated 27.06.2024, the petitioner MCL has raised strong 
objections by preparing following tabular chart:
S. 
No
Purported 
pending works 
mentioned 
by Claims 
Commission
Ground of MCL for closure of the Commission
01
To dispose of 
2836 Nos. of 
Civil Cases and 
232 Nos. of 
Misc. Cases filed 
by land oustees 
of 10 villages.
At para 68.iii.c of order dated 03.11.2022, this 
Hon’ble Court had directed that, “This court is of 
the opinion that the Commission could not reopen 
determinations based upon change of policies of 
the State given that the benefits adjudicated by it 
based on factual determinations has crystallised. 
In many cases, MCL has actually provided 
employment to several individuals. Consequently, 
it is held that all cases that have been adjudicated 
and were approved by this court cannot be 
reopened”. Since the PAF list of the 10 villages 
have been approved by the Hon’ble Court, the 
Claims Commission cannot re-open those cases. 
Subsequently Hon’ble Court in its order dated 
10.10.2023 had directed that, “in case of any 
grievance by any party with respect to any order 
or report of the Claims Commission, the grievance 
should be first articulated before the High Court, 
in appropriate proceedings.” The Commission 
cannot hear all of such cases as is sought to be 
heard, as the same pertain to the villages whose 
reports have already been finalised, and have 
been approved by this Hon’ble Court and this 
Hon’ble Court has thereafter in express directions 
given vide Judgement dated 03.11.2022 stated 
that there shall not be any re-opening in so far as 
the 10 villages are concerned. Thus, the act of the 
Claims Commission would amount to re-opening 
of cases which have already attained finality and 
the same cannot be permitted. In view of the 
above, the Claims Commission cannot re-open 
the cases of 10 villages.
164
02
In 24 Nos. of writ 
petitions Hon’ble 
High Court 
has directed 
the Claims 
Commission to 
dispose these 
cases.
The Claims Commission is hearing cases in 
so far as the 10 villages which issues have 
already attained finality. The said issues were 
kept pending by the Claims Commission and not 
decided in order to prolong the work of the Claims 
Commission instead of completing the main task 
assigned by this Hon’ble Court. This Hon’ble Court 
has vide its Order dated 03.11.2022 passed in 
M.A No. 231 of 2019 expressly directed that all 
the issues which have attained finality in so far as 
the 10 villages the same shall not be re-opened, 
and therefore, the question of hearing or deciding 
any of such cases by the Claims Commission 
does not arise.
03
To dispose of 
194 Nos. of 
cases filed by 
the villagers of 
Jhupurunga and 
Tumulia.
The villages acquired under CBA by MCL, apart 
from the villages in Sundargarh District, R&R 
Policy of Govt. of Odisha, 2006 is applicable 
and District Collector is the competent authority 
to redress the grievances, pertaining to R&R 
benefits, of the project affected families. 
As per para 68.iii.a of the judgement dated 
3.11.2022 of this Hon’bie Court the R&R Policy 
2006 as amended by the 2013 policy more 
specifically Clause 20, clearly provides that 
there shall be a District and Directorate Level 
grievance redressal mechanism for project 
affected persons. The same has been set up 
and can hear all of such grievances if any. 
Hence, the Collector, Sundargarh can also 
hear the grievance related to R&R benefits of 
these 04 villages as is similarly done in other 
areas. In case of any grievance regarding 
amount of compensation or apportionment 
of compensation, CBA Tribunal is constituted 
w/s 17 of CBA Act, 1957 to hear the grievances 
of the project affected families (land losers). A 
Statutory Tribunal set up under the CBA Act is 
functioning in Jharsuguda District Odisha. As 
there is well settled mechanism in the Odisha 
R&R Policy and in CBA Act to redress the 
grievance of the affected families (land losers), 
the same can be dealt with appropriately.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
165
Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. & Anr. v. 
Mathias Oram & Ors.
04
Certify the 
suitability of 
Resettlement 
sites for shifting 
of eligible land 
oustees, as 
directed by 
the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court 
vide order dated 
10.07.2017
At para 68.iv.a of order 03.11.2022, this Hon’ble 
Court had directed that:
“On the point of housing plots, it is hereby declared 
and directed that the State and MCL are under 
an obligation to ensure that the land acquired 
by it in those areas which are to be developed, 
have to be developed. The State Government 
shall ensure that at least three nodal officers 
from the departments concerned are deployed 
for facilitating this task of coordinating with 
allagencies and ensuring that the development of 
the plots duly takes place to enable the Collector 
to make the necessary allotments within the time 
indicated”.
Hence, the commission has no role to play in 
Resettlement sites for either allotment of plots or 
shifting of the project displaced families.
05
Determining 
R&R benefits 
of land oustees 
of 4 acquired 
villages, namely 
Tumulia, 
Kiripsira, 
Jhupurunga, 
and Ratansara, 
the Commission 
subject to the 
appropriate 
direction of 
the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court.
The Petitioner MCL, the Land oustees, and 
District Administration after holding a meeting, 
addressed a letter dated 25.01.2024 (at page 59 
of the Vol-Il documents of Claims Commission 
dated 27.06.2024), to the Claims Commission 
to prepare the PAF list. However, the Claims 
Commission vide its Letter dated 12.02.2024 
(at page 71 of the Vol-II documents of Claims 
Commission dated 27.06.2024) refused to do the 
same, stating that there is no direction from this 
Hon’ble Court to prepare the PAF list. In order 
to obviate any further delays, the Petitioner MCL 
herein itself preparing and finalising the PAF list 
for village Jhupurunga as per the principle set 
by this Hon’ble Court in M.A. 231 of 2019 in 
SLP(C) No. 6933 of 2007 dated 03.11.2022, in 
consultation with the 03 nodal officers appointed 
by State Government. After preparation of PAF 
lists it will be sent to Collector, Sundargarh for 
approval. On approval of the PAF list by Collector, 
Rehabilitation & Resettlement benefits will be 
provided to the villagers according to the approved 
list. The same procedure is being followed in other 
districts coming under the coalfield area of MCL 
in the state of Odisha. Similarly, the PAF list for 
Tumulia, would be prepared by the Petitioner 
MCL. In so far as village Kiripsira and Ratansara
166
is concerned, the same does not fall within 
the Coal Block of MCL, and this Hon’ble Court 
vide its Order dated 15.07.2013 passed in SLP 
(C) No. 6933 of 2007, stated that since village 
Ratanrasa and Kiripsara was transferred by 
the Union of India to other companies, only 
payment of compensation is the liability of MCL 
and it may recover the said amount from the 
successor company. The Petitioner states that it 
is also pertinent to note that the in practice, and 
otherwise in all acquisitions the modality adopted 
is that the Petitioner MCL carries out the survey 
and preparation of the Project Affected Persons 
(PAF) list and thereafter the same is submitted 
to the District Administration which verifies the 
same and consequent to such verification the 
District Collector approves the PAF list. Once such 
PAF list receives the approval from the District 
Collector, the Petitioner MCL extends the R&R 
benefits to the persons as figuring in the approved 
PAF List. Hence, the commission has no role 
either in preparation of PAF list or in extending 
employment & Monetary Compensation.
8.	
We had heard the concerned learned counsels for the parties on 
06.08.2024 permitting them to file brief note of submissions, which 
they have filed.
9.	
Though the case has a chequered history, to put it in nutshell, the 
Claims Commission was appointed by this Court vide the order dated 
19.07.2010 passed in SLP(C) No. 6933 of 2007, for determining the 
claim of compensation in respect of vast portions of lands acquired 
by the Central Government in Village Gopalpur and others of the 
District Sundergarh, Orissa. The said Commission was set up for 
carrying out the exercise for the following villages.
(i)	
Sardega
(ii)	
Jhupurunga
(iii)	 Ratansara
(iv)	 Tikilipara
(v)	
Siarmal
(vi)	 Tumulia
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
167
Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. & Anr. v. 
Mathias Oram & Ors.
(vii)	 Karlikachhar
(viii)	 Kulda
(ix)	 Bankibahal
(x)	
Balinga
(xi)	 Garjanbahal
(xii)	 Bangurkela
(xiii)	 Kiripsira
(xiv)	Lalma R.F.
10.	 Out of the afore stated villages, part payment was already made 
at the relevant time in case of villages Sardega and Tikilipara and 
full payment was made in case of villages Bankibahal and Balinga, 
however the possession was not fully taken.
11.	 Based on the Report submitted by the Claims Commission in relation 
to the village Gopalpur, this Court had passed an order dated 
19.04.2012 approving the recommendations contained therein and 
made it an order of the Court. 
12.	 Following the Gopalpur model, the Commission had submitted the 
reports for the villages Balinga, Bankibahal, Sardega and Tikilipara, 
and this Court vide the order dated 08.08.2012 had approved the 
said reports, and observed that the Commission may follow as far as 
practicable, the same basis in other villages for which compensation 
was yet to be fixed. It further appears that thereafter vide the 
order dated 10.04.2013, this Court accepted and approved the 
Commission’s Reports with respect to villages Kulda and Garjanbahal, 
and vide the order dated 15.07.2013 for the village Karlikachhar. 
It further appears that this Court also took notice of the fact that 
the lands in two villages namely Kiripsara and Ratansara were 
transferred by the Central Government to some other Companies, 
and therefore observed that the payment of compensation would be 
MCL’s liability at the initial stage, and it could later recover the sums 
from the successor companies.
13.	 This Court disposed of the said SLP on 10.07.2017 after receiving the 
report from the Commission and considering the recommendations 
made by the Amicus Curiae in respect of the outstanding issues. 
168
The Court observed that “we are broadly in agreement with the 
recommendations made by the learned Amicus. We, however, leave 
it open to the appellants or any other affected parties to put forward 
their objections before the High Court/ Commission since we are 
inclined to leave such matters to be dealt with by the High Court/ 
Commission.”
14.	 It appears that thereafter several applications were moved by the 
MCL and also by the land owners seeking a range of directions, and 
some had also filed the contempt proceedings. This Court vide the 
detailed judgment dated 03.11.2022 passed in M.A. No. 231 of 2019 
in SLP (C) No. 6933 of 2007 along with other Contempt Petitions 
disposed of the same after dealing with all the contentious issues 
and recording the findings thereon. The Court gave final directions 
in Paragraph 68 as under: -
“Conclusions and Directions
68. Having regard to the following discussion, it is held 
as follows:
i.	
Re point no.1 - compensation for the land acquired: 
cut-off date for determining compensation for land 
acquired is to be based upon the cut-off date approved 
by this court in relation to village Gopalpur, i.e., 
September 2010. At the same time, it is directed that 
since common cut-off date has been accepted, all 
benefits flowing from it, including statutory interest 
upon compensation and solatium, is determinable 
on  the basis of that cut-off date for the entire 
acquisition.
ii.	
Re point no. 2 - on the applicability of the R&R Act, 
2013: the R&R Act cannot apply prior to the date 
it was brought into force i.e., before 01.01.2014. 
In the present case, it applies from the date the 
Central Government issued a notification bringing 
into force the proceedings of the First, Second and 
Third Schedules to the enactment specified in the 
Fourth Schedule, which in this case was the CBA 
Act. The date therefore, on which the R&R Act, 2013 
is applicable from, is 28.08.2015. Additionally, the 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
169
Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. & Anr. v. 
Mathias Oram & Ors.
report which was finalised before that date cannot 
be interfered with. The land owners and displaced 
families residing in the villages for which reports 
were prepared earlier than 28.08.2015, would not 
therefore be entitled to the benefits of the R&R Act, 
2013. Hence, the benefits of the R&R Act apply 
to displaced families and land owners of Kiripsira, 
Ratansara, Jhupuranga and Tumulia.
iii.	
Re point no. 3, 4 and 5:
a.	
It is held that the R&R Policy 2006 as amended by 
the 2013 policy applies for the purpose of employment 
benefits.
b.	
A family unit would comprise of head of family or 
father, a major son, and an unmarried daughter having 
regard to the definition and the note appended thereof. 
In case, for some reason, the major son cannot be 
given employment, and there exists a major grandson, 
he would then be eligible for consideration. In other 
words, two members (father and son or father and 
grandson) would be eligible for employment and not 
three, in addition to the unmarried daughter who is 
also to be treated as separate unit.
c.	
This court is of the opinion that the Commission could 
not reopen determinations based upon change of 
policies of the State given that the benefits adjudicated 
by it based on factual determinations has crystallised. 
In many cases, MCL has actually provided employment 
to several individuals. Consequently, it is held that all 
cases that have been adjudicated and were approved 
by this court cannot be reopened.
iv.	
Re point no. 6:
a.	
On the point of housing plots, it is hereby declared 
and directed that the State and MCL are under an 
obligation to ensure that the land acquired by it in 
those areas which are to be developed, have to be 
developed. The State Government shall ensure that 
at least three nodal officers from the departments 
170
concerned are deployed for facilitating this task of 
coordinating with all agencies and ensuring that the 
development of the plots duly takes place to enable 
the Collector to make the necessary allotments within 
the time indicated. These nodal officials shall be 
duly empowered by the state, through appropriate 
notifications to issue all necessary consequential 
orders, for the implementation of resettlement and 
rehabilitation measures. The Chief Secretary of the 
Orissa State Government shall select the officers, and 
issue the necessary notifications. Furthermore, the 
State shall ensure that these officers are not posted 
out, for at least 3 years, or till the task of rehabilitation 
and resettlement is completed.
b.	
The Collector shall ensure that the plots earmarked 
are duly notified for the concerned villages and land 
owners by giving due publicity and adequate notice. 
The views of the landowners shall be ascertained 
and noted, for which purpose, adequate notice shall 
be given, specifying the venue, date and time of 
consultation.
c.	
In case any individual land owner(s) are not interested 
for allotment of the plots, it is open for them to state 
so. The Collector shall in such event record their 
disclaimer expressly in writing and issue a certificate. 
In that event the displaced family would be entitled 
to a one-time cash settlement of Rs.25 lakhs.
d.	
After ascertaining the number of displaced families’ 
entitlements, and having regard to the availability of 
plots, the Collector shall conduct a draw of lots, and 
if needed, more than one draw of lots, whereby plots 
are allotted to the concerned displaced families. In 
case, for any reason such plot or plots cannot be 
handed over within two years, or are not available, 
the leftover families so to say would be entitled to the 
one-time compensation of Rs.25 lakhs with interest 
@ 7% per annum, for two years.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
171
Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. & Anr. v. 
Mathias Oram & Ors.
v.	
Re point no. 7:
a.	
The State shall ensure that all facilities and amenities 
are developed in accordance with the Third Schedule 
to the R&R Act, 2013 within three years in which 
plots are handed over to the displaced families or 
in any event within three years from the date of this 
judgment. The necessary funding for this purpose 
shall be by MCL, in addition to the State’s obligation 
to spend its resources.
b.	
The members of the SC/ST communities shall be 
entitled to the preservation and protection of their 
status in view of Section 42 of the R&R Act, 2013. 
Consequently, the concerned Collectors shall ensure 
that appropriate caste certificates are issued in this 
regard, given that land owners have been moved 
involuntarily and would have to migrate to other areas.
vi.	
This court further directs that compensation 
determination in any event shall be completed and 
payments made within six months from today. The 
Commission shall ensure that this task is taken up 
as far as possible and completed within that time 
frame. Consequently, the Commission shall finalize 
the reports for villages Kiripsira and Ratansara. As 
regards the reports of Jhupuranga, and Tumulia, the 
Commission shall complete the task of redetermining 
compensation within three months. The State shall 
ensure that compensation in respect of four villages 
is determined in accordance with the R&R Act, 
2013. Wherever compensation has not actually been 
disbursed, the State shall do so within 6 months from 
pronouncement of this judgment.
vii.	 MCL is under an obligation to ensure that employment 
benefits are granted and extended and offers are 
made in accordance with the 2013 policy in all cases 
where the lists of those who opted for employment 
has not been finalised. It is clarified in this regard 
that wherever employment has been obtained, the 
same shall not be reopened. Likewise, the question of 
172
reopening entitlements for employment, based upon 
the interpretation of this court shall not be reopened 
in case of villages where reports have been accepted 
through previous orders.
viii.	 In the event any family undertakes that its members 
are not desirous or do not wish to opt for employment, 
the State shall, through the nodal officers, ensure 
that the disclaimer is voluntary, and that one-time 
compensation indicated in the 2006 policy or under the 
R&R Act, 2013 or the one-time offer of Rs.16 lakhs by 
MCL, as submitted by the learned ASG (whichever is 
more beneficial), is paid to the family concerned. The 
Collector must ensure the same is provided.
ix.	
The court hereby directs that the Commission should 
complete its task and that its report should be the 
basis for disbursement of compensation, one-time 
rehabilitation package of Rs.25 lakhs per family as 
indicated above and employment offer within one 
year from today. In case of any vacancy in the Office 
of Chairman of the Commission, the Chief Justice of 
the Orissa High Court shall nominate a retired judge 
of that court. In the event of any other vacancy, the 
Government of Orissa shall nominate the concerned 
members. However, it is clarified that the government 
nominees should not be ex-officio or part time 
members, and should be of the rank and status of 
Additional Secretary, with experience in the Social 
Welfare or Revenue Departments at senior levels.
x.	
It is further directed that all concerned landowners 
who have continued to occupy the lands shall vacate 
it upon the deposit of compensation. MCL shall be 
immediately granted possession of such lands. The 
Collector or the concerned authority shall issue a 
certificate in this regard which shall entitle them to 
the one-time rehabilitation payment or payment in 
lieu of compensation or any other benefit under the 
Act, according to the choice exercised by them in 
the manner indicated above.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
173
Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. & Anr. v. 
Mathias Oram & Ors.
69. It is lastly directed that any fresh dispute, on account 
of calculation of compensation, disbursement of benefits 
etc., would be adjudicated by the High Court. This court 
will not entertain miscellaneous application in individual 
cases in this regard.”
15.	 From the said judgment dated 03.11.2022 passed by this Court, it 
is explicitly clear that this Court after elucidating the issues involved 
had unequivocably held in Paragraph 32 thereof that the Gopalpur 
Model for determining the compensation was applied in respect of the 
villages for which reports were prepared and approved by the courts 
(Gopalpur, Sardega, Balinga, Bankibahal, Tikilipara, Garjanbahal, 
Kulda, Karlikachhar, Siarmal, and Bangurkela). However, in regard 
to four villages i.e., Tumulia, Jhupuranga, Ratansara, and Kirpsara, 
no award was approved on the said date. 
16.	 The Court further held in Paragraph 34 as under: -
“34. In the light of the above discussion, it is held that the 
First Schedule of the R&R Act, 2013 is applicable to the 
acquisition in question, made by the Central Government 
in favour of MCL, in respect of the villages, the reports of 
which were not approved prior to 28.10.2015. Accordingly, 
the compensation based upon the market value for the four 
villages i.e., Tumulia, Jhupuranga, Ratansara, and Kirpsara 
have to be re-determined in accordance with the provisions 
of the First Schedule to the R&R Act, 2013. Since the 
extent to land involved, identification of land owners, and 
the basic market value along with solatium and interest 
payments, have been determined, the only additional 
exercise which the Commission has to carry out is the 
differential payable after the re-determination in respect 
of all the elements i.e., the market value, solatium, and 
further interest. It is also further clarified that the villages in 
respect of which this court has already approved reports of 
the Commission, and entitlements have been determined, 
even availed of, or pending implementation, i.e., the other 
ten villages, the issues shall stand finalized - there can be 
no re-determination on the basis of the present judgment.” 
17.	 The Court after analyzing each and every point meticulously gave 
clear and precise directions in Paragraphs 68 and 69 quoted above 
174
and also directed that any fresh dispute on account of calculation of 
compensation, disbursement of benefits etc. would be adjudicated 
by the High Court, and this Court will not entertain Miscellaneous 
Application in individual cases in this regard. Despite such clear 
conclusions and directions, the present Miscellaneous Applications 
have been filed seeking directions.
18.	 In M.A. No. 2662/2023, the Secretary-cum-Administrative Nodal 
Officer, Claims Commissioner, Bhubaneshwar had sought extension 
of time to finalise the report of village Ratansara till the end of 30th 
June, 2024.
19.	 It may be noted that the said Miscellaneous Application was filed 
in November, 2023. As mentioned hereinabove, this Court had 
vide the order dated 23.01.2024 extended the term of Commission 
till 15.07.2024 after recording the statement of Secretary of the 
Commission that the Commission shall finalise the claim in respect 
of the village Ratansara by June, 2024. However, the Commission 
has submitted the status report showing the progress and pendency 
of work before it as on 27.06.2024.
20.	 It is pertinent to note that this Court in the judgment and order dated 
03.11.2022 had clearly held that the villages in respect of which this 
Court has already approved the reports of the Commission determining 
the entitlements in respect of the 10 villages, the issues had stood 
finalized, and there could be no re-determination on the basis of the 
said judgment. Accordingly, it was directed in Paragraph 68 (iii)(c) 
that the Commission can not reopen determinations based on change 
of policies of the State, given that benefits adjudicated by it based 
on factual determination has been crystalized and consequently, all 
the cases that have been adjudicated and approved by this Court 
can not be reopened. However, the Commission appears to have 
entertained the cases filed by the land oustees of 10 villages, whose 
reports have already been finalized and approved by this Court. 
21.	 Similarly, the Commission also appears to have travelled beyond the 
directions given by this Court in the said judgment dated 03.11.2022, 
by entertaining the issues raised by the villagers and land oustees of 
four villages namely Tumulia, kiripsira, Jhupuranga and Ratansara 
with regard to R&R benefits. With regard to these four villages, it 
may be noted that this Court in Paragraph 34 of the judgment dated 
03.11.2022 had specifically held that “since the extent of land involved, 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
175
Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. & Anr. v. 
Mathias Oram & Ors.
identification of law owners, and the basic market value along with 
solatium and interest payments, have been determined, the only 
additional exercise which the Commission has to carry out is the 
differential payable after the re-determination in respect of all the 
elements i.e. the market value, solatium, and further interest.” This 
Court had clearly earmarked the task of the Commission and of the 
other Authorities and given final directions in Paragraph 68 and 69 
thereof, which had to be followed accordingly. The Commission also 
appears to have entertained the issues with regard to the suitability 
of resettlement sites for shifting of the eligible land oustees, taking 
recourse to the order passed by this Court on 10.07.2017. 
22.	 In our opinion, the Commission should not have entertained any of 
these issues, when all the issues have been alluded and dealt with 
thoroughly by this Court in the judgment dated 03.11.2022. 
23.	 Now, so far as the report submitted by the Commission for the village 
Ratansara is concerned, it appears that out of the three members, 
one member of the Commission has given dissenting opinion as 
regards the Method of calculation adopted by the Commission in 
its report dated 27.06.2024. Since, the petitioner MCL had already 
raised objections with regard to the Method of calculation, this Court 
vide the order dated 10.10.2023 had transferred the issue to the 
High Court of Orissa and the Writ Petition (C) being No. 39185/2023 
in this regard is pending before the said High Court. As stated 
by the petitioner MCL, it has already made payment towards the 
compensation for the structure, without prejudice to its rights and 
contentions as regards the Method of calculation, however, has not 
made payment with regard to the compensation for the land, by 
stating that the said compensation shall be paid as per the order that 
may be passed by the High Court of Orissa in the pending petition.
24.	 In view of the above, it is directed that the High Court shall decide the 
Writ Petition (C) being No. 39185/2023, as expeditiously as possible 
and preferably within three months from the date of receipt of this 
order. The MCL shall make payment towards the compensation 
immediately after the final judgment and order is passed by the High 
Court in this regard. It is clarified that that we have not expressed any 
opinion on the correctness of the Method of calculation adopted by the 
Commission so far as village Ratansara is concerned and the High 
Court shall decide the same considering the rights and contentions 
176
of the parties as may be legally permissible. It is needless to say 
that the either of the aggrieved party shall be at liberty to challenge 
the order of the High Court, if they desire to do so in accordance 
with law.
25.	 In the aforesaid premises, no further order for extension of the 
term of the Commission is passed. The M.A. No. 2662/2023 stands 
disposed of accordingly. 
26.	 So far as M.A. (D) No.28318/2024 is concerned, the Applicant-
Manikeswari Bisthapita Committee has prayed to direct the 
Commission to prepare PAF/PDF list determining the R & R benefits 
of the four villages namely Tumulia, Jhupurunga, Kiripsira and 
Ratansara. In view of the clear and explicit conclusions and directions 
given by this Court in the judgment dated 03.11.2022, and in view 
of the above order passed by this Court in M.A. No. 2662/2023, no 
such directions as prayed for could be issued. Suffice it to say that it 
shall be open for the applicant/claimants to raise the issues, as may 
be permissible under the law, before the concerned authorities of the 
State, in view of the directions given by this Court in the judgment 
dated 03.11.2022.
27.	 In that view of the matter the M.A. (D) No.28318/2024 is dismissed. 
All pending I.A.s filed therein also stand dismissed.
28.	 The M.A. (D) No.30630/2024 has been filed by the eight applicants 
praying to direct the Commission to decide their cases at the earliest. 
The said M.A. also does not survive in view of the above order and 
is dismissed. All pending I.A.s filed therein also stand dismissed.
Result of the case: MA’s and IA’s dismissed. 
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain