[2025] 1 S.C.R. 498 : 2025 INSC 51
Inspector, Railway Protection Force, Kottayam 
v. 
Mathew K Cherian & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 4169 of 2024)
09 January 2025
[Dipankar Datta* and Prashant Kumar Mishra, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the act of creating fake/multiple user IDs by an individual, 
who may or may not be an authorized railway agent, with the intention 
to procure and supply online tickets through IRCTC portal would 
constitute an offence under Section 143 of the Railways Act, 1989.
Headnotes†
Railways Act, 1989 – s.143 – In the first of the appeal (lead 
appeal), M was accused of creating fraudulent user IDs with 
the Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation web 
portal to procure and peddle railway tickets for profit, without 
being an agent authorised to procure and supply railway 
tickets and, therefore, operating an unauthorised business for 
procurement and supply of railway tickets – Crime case u/s.143 
of the 1989 Act was registered – M filed application u/s.482 
CrPC – The High Court, vide the impugned order, quashed the 
criminal proceedings – In the another connected appeal, the 
offence alleged against R, an authorised agent, was that he 
has been supplying e-tickets to various customers, and that 
these e-tickets had been booked through multiple user IDs – 
Crime case u/s.143 of the 1989 Act was registered – R filed 
application u/s.482 before the High Court – The High Court 
refused to quash the criminal proceedings – Correctness:
Held: S.143, on its plain language, prohibits any person, other than 
a railway servant or an authorised agent, to conduct the business 
of procurement and supply of railway tickets – The provision 
does not specify the modalities of the procurement and supply – 
Hence, if the natural and ordinary meaning is given to the section, 
keeping in mind the objective and purpose of the legislation, it 
admits of no doubt that this provision criminalises unauthorised 
procurement and supply, irrespective of the mode of procurement 
* Author
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
499
Inspector, Railway Protection Force, Kottayam v.  
Mathew K Cherian & Anr.
and supply – The mere fact of the system of e-reservation and 
e-tickets being introduced after the enactment of the Act does not 
render the provision in s.143 toothless to combat the illegal sale 
of e-tickets – S.143, importantly, makes no distinction between 
physical and online sale of tickets – The mischief that the provision 
seeks to remedy is that there should not be illegal and unauthorised 
procurement and sale of tickets, whatever be the mode-physical 
or online – In the lead appeal, the facts of the case prima facie 
reveal the commission of an offence u/s.143 of the Act – M, without 
the authorisation of the railways, was carrying on a business of 
procurement and supply of railway tickets – The allegations against 
M taken at face value fulfil the elements required u/s.143(1)(a) of 
the Act – In the connected appeals, R was an authorised agent of 
the railways carrying on the business of procurement and supply of 
railway tickets – S.143 only deals with the actions of unauthorised 
persons and does not mandate a procedure to be followed by 
the authorised agents for procuring or supplying tickets to its 
customers – The nature of allegations against R in the connected 
appeal, though serious, s.143 would not be attracted insofar as he 
is concerned – To sum up, M not being an authorised agent has 
to face the proceedings against him while R, being an authorised 
agent, cannot be proceeded against u/s.143 of the Act for alleged 
breach of any of the terms and conditions of the contract – Thus, 
criminal proceedings against M are restored and the proceedings 
against R are hereby quashed. [Paras 27, 28, 34, 35, 37, 38, 40]
Interpretation of Statutes – Statutory provision – Subsequent 
developments:
Held: Statutory interpretation has to follow certain principles which 
have been formulated through legal precedents – No court can 
refuse to enforce a provision on the sole basis of the provision 
predating any subsequent development regarding the ticketing 
process – If it can be demonstrated that a statutory provision is 
broad enough to envelop the subsequent developments, even 
if the developments were not envisioned by the legislature, the 
provision would stay operational. [Para 21]
Interpretation of Statutes – Language of statute – Addition or 
deletion of words:
Held: It is settled that if the language of the particular statute under 
consideration is clear and unambiguous, it is not for the courts 
500
to add to or delete any words from the statute in the guise of 
ascertaining what could have been the legislative intent. [Para 26]
Case Law Cited
Senior Electric Inspector v. Laxminarayan Chopra [1962] SCR 3 
146 : AIR 1962 SC 159; Dharani Sugars and Chemicals Ltd. v. 
Union of India [2019] 6 SCR 307 : (2019) 5 SCC 480; Jugalkishore 
Saraf v. Raw Cotton Co. Ltd. [1955] 1 SCR 1369 : AIR 1955 SC 
376; Ansal Properties & Industries Ltd. v. State of Haryana [2009] 
1 SCR 553 : (2009) 3 SCC 553 – relied on.
R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab [1960] 3 SCR 311 : 1960 SCC 
OnLine SC 21; State of W.B. v. Swapan Kumar Guha [1982] 3 SCR 
121 : (1982) 1 SCC 561; State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal [1992] 
Supp. 3 SCR 735 : (1992) Supp. 1 SCC 335; Pepsi Foods Ltd. 
v. Special Judicial Magistrate [1997] Supp. 5 SCR 12 : (1998) 5 
SCC 749; Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander [2012] 7 SCR 988 : 
(2012) 9 SCC 460 – referred to.
Comdel Commodities Ltd. v. Siporex Trade S.A. (No. 2) (1990) 2 
All ER 552 (HL) – referred to.
List of Acts
Railways Act, 1989; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Unauthorized Business; Procure; Supply; Railway e-tickets; 
Fraudulent Activity; Fake and Multiple User-Ids; Interpretation of 
Statutes; Authorized Agents; Statutory Interpretation; Disciplinary 
Control; Modalities of Procurement and Supply; Sale of Valueless 
Tickets.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
4169 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 22.09.2016 of the High Court 
of Kerala at Ernakulam in CRLMC No. 1991 of 2016
With
Criminal Appeal Nos. 139-140 of 2025
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
501
Inspector, Railway Protection Force, Kottayam v.  
Mathew K Cherian & Anr.
Appearances for Parties
Mrs. Aishwarya Bhati, A.S.G., P. N. Prakash, Sr. Adv., Namit 
Saxena, Amrish Kumar, Mrs. Shivika Mehra, Mrs. Sonia Mathur, 
Merusagar Samantray, Sushil Kumar Dubey, Ms. Priyanka Terdal, 
Ms. Riddhi Jad, Advs. for the Appellant.
Amrish Kumar, A. Raghunath, Alim Anvar, Nishe Rajen Shonker, 
Mrs. Anu K. Joy, Ajith Anto Perumbully, Advs. for the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Dipankar Datta, J.
Introduction
1.	
Common question of law touching interpretation of Section 143 of the 
Railways Act, 19891 is involved in these appeals by special leave; 
hence, we propose to decide the same by this common judgment. 
2.	
In the first of the two sets of appeals,2 the judgment and order3 of 
the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulum4 is assailed whereby criminal 
proceedings under Section 143 of the Act launched against the first 
respondent – Mathew K. Cheriian5 – was quashed.
3.	
In the connected appeals, the appellant - J. Ramesh6 – has assailed 
the judgment and order7 of the High Court of Judicature at Madras8 
refusing to quash the criminal proceedings launched against Ramesh 
under Section 143 of the Act.
Factual Matrix
4.	
The factual scenario of the two sets of appeals are not too complicated. 
The facts which are germane are noted as a precursor to our discussion.
1	
the Act 
2	
the lead appeal
3	
in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 1991/2016 dt. 22.09.2016
4	
Kerala High Court
5	
Mathew
6	
Ramesh
7	
In CRL. O.P. No.18701/2020 18703/2020 and Crl. MP. Nos.7328/2020 and 7329/2020
8	
Madras High Court
502
5.	
The prosecution case in the lead appeal is that on 11.03.2016, 
on reliable information being disclosed to the Inspector, Railway 
Protection Force,9 that unauthorised business of procuring and 
supplying railway e-tickets was being carried out in the office 
of Mathew, Crime Case No. 524/2016 under Section 143 of the 
Act was registered and a search conducted thereat. During the 
search and seizure operation, one employee named Joby Jose of 
Kosamattam Finance, a non-banking finance company (of which 
Mathew happened to be the managing director) was arrested and 
17 pieces of evidence were seized. In his confessional statement, 
Joby Jose stated he was working under the supervision of Mathew. 
On the basis of this statement, Mathew was made co-accused in 
Crime Case No. 524/2016. He was accused of creating fraudulent 
user IDs with the Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation10 
web portal to procure and peddle railway tickets for profit, without 
being an agent authorised to procure and supply railway tickets 
and, therefore, operating an unauthorised business for procurement 
and supply of railway tickets. Aggrieved, Mathew moved the Kerala 
High Court under Section 482, Code of Criminal Procedure, 197311 
seeking quashing of the proceedings. The Kerala High Court, vide 
the impugned order, quashed the criminal proceedings emanating 
from Crime Case No. 524/2016. Dissatisfied thereby, the Inspector, 
RPF is in appeal. 
6.	
The connected appeals arise out of Case Crime No. 3116/2019 
and Case Crime No. 600/2020. The case of the prosecution is that 
Ramesh and his son are the owners of “Big Top Travels” which 
is an authorised agent for railway e-tickets. On 05.12.2019, Case 
Crime No. 3116/2019 came to be registered against Ramesh under 
Section 143 of the Act on the basis of a search and seizure operation 
conducted by a special team of the RPF in the shop premises of 
Ramesh. The offence alleged against him is that he has been 
supplying e-tickets to various customers, and that these e-tickets had 
been booked through multiple user IDs. Case Crime No. 600/2020 
was registered against Ramesh, also under Section 143(1)(a) of 
the Act for his involvement in fraudulent activities such as supply of 
9	
RPF
10	
IRCTC
11	
Cr.PC
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
503
Inspector, Railway Protection Force, Kottayam v.  
Mathew K Cherian & Anr.
Tatkal e-tickets by creating multiple personal-user IDs and issuing 
unauthorised e-tickets procured through IRCTC website, contrary 
to IRCTC Rules. Ramesh, feeling aggrieved by initiation of criminal 
action by the respondent-authorities, approached the Madras High 
Court under Section 482, Cr. PC with a prayer to quash the criminal 
proceedings. The Madras High Court, however, refused to quash 
the criminal proceedings. Dissatisfied with the impugned order of 
the Madras High Court, Ramesh has questioned the same in the 
connected appeals. 
Submissions
7.	
For the sake of brevity, the submissions advanced by the parties 
in both sets of the appeals are noted together. Arguments of the 
prosecution can be summarised as follows:
I.	
Section 143 of the Act does not permit authorised agents to carry 
out unauthorised actions under the façade of authorisation. When 
an authorised agent carries out unauthorised transactions using 
the personal IDs of other individuals, the cloak of authorisation 
cannot be used as a ruse. Therefore, to be exempt from the 
application of Section 143, both the status of the person and 
the nature of the action must be considered.
II.	
Section 143 is part of the overall scheme to promote the efficacy 
of the railway system and its operations. Therefore, the Court 
must interpret the provision in line with the object of the statute. 
III.	
Mathew, as the Managing Director of a finance company, created 
hundreds of user IDs to sell railway tickets at a premium which 
constitutes an offence under Section 143. 
IV.	
Section 143 makes no distinction between physical tickets 
and e-tickets and only contemplates penal action against 
unauthorised carrying on of the business of procuring and 
supplying railway tickets. 
V.	
Offence under Section 143 is a social crime. The mischief is 
sought to be addressed by limiting the number of tickets that 
an individual can purchase using his personal ID and, thereby, 
touting of railway tickets is prevented.
VI.	 The Kerala High Court has erred in quashing the criminal 
proceedings at this stage as a bare perusal of the complaint 
504
reveals that all the ingredients under Section 143 are prima 
facie attracted.
VII.	 The Madras High Court has correctly refrained from following 
the erroneous decision of the Kerala High Court.
VIII.	 While upholding the decision of the Madras High Court, the 
decision of the Kerala High Court ought to be reversed and the 
prosecution allowed to lead its evidence before the relevant trial 
courts for the proceedings to be taken to its logical conclusion. 
8.	
The submissions on behalf of the accused – Mathew and Ramesh – 
in favour of quashing of the proceedings, as advanced before us, 
are these:
I.	
The plain and unambiguous words of Section 143 of the Act 
make it clear that the creation of multiple user IDs is not an 
offence under Section 143, and Section 143 must be construed 
strictly as it is a penal provision. 
II.	
The materialisation of e-ticketing scheme could not have been 
conceptualised by the legislature at the time of passing the Act, 
as the scheme as well as the internet did not exist at that time.
III.	
Section 143(1)(a) was intended to penalise the sale of tickets 
by persons other than railway servants and authorized agents.
IV.	
Ramesh is an authorised agent and, thus, could not have been 
proceeded against under Section 143(1), on its own terms; 
and, if at all, there has been a breach or violation of the terms 
and conditions of the contract by Ramesh, the remedy of the 
railways/RPF is to approach the civil court.
V.	
The decision of the Madras High Court ought to be reversed and 
the decision of the Kerala High Court upheld, thereby bringing 
down the curtain on both the criminal proceedings. 
Impugned Orders
9.	
Now, let us have a look at the orders impugned before us. A thorough 
examination thereof would enable us to arrive at an appropriate 
conclusion. 
10.	 In the lead appeal, the Kerala High Court has quashed the criminal 
proceedings against the first respondent. The reasons assigned 
therefor are reproduced below:
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
505
Inspector, Railway Protection Force, Kottayam v.  
Mathew K Cherian & Anr.
“5. The Act was enacted much before the advent of 
e-ticket system. The object of Section 143 is to prevent 
procurement of ticket for travelling on railway or in a 
reserved compartment or journey in a train by any person 
with the ticket not being issued by railway servant or by an 
authorised agent. It appears that Railway wants to ensure 
the authenticity of the tickets issued to the travellers on 
a travel in a railway. It appears that many travellers were 
travelling on railway in a ticket not being issued to them 
and issued in the name of third parties. The Railways Act 
wants to ensure that the ticket is issued by railway servant 
or agent authorised on this behalf as the case may be to 
a genuine travellers (sic, “traveller”).
6. …The use of internet medium registered in the name 
of a person, to issue tickets to a third party is not one 
contemplated under Section 143 for the purpose of 
considering it as an offence. … There is no sale of ticket 
by the petitioner as even admitted in the counter, the sale 
is being conducted by IRCTC. The use of computer or 
use of printer for printing ticket purchased by a traveller 
cannot be deemed as sale effected by the owner of the 
computer or printer. Procuring tickets has to be understood 
as providing or giving tickets to the travellers. Admittedly 
tickets are procured by the genuine travellers. When 
legislature considered an actionable wrong in a particular 
manner in a brick and mortar business, it cannot be applied 
to an online business unless all elements constituting the 
offence-are present in the online business. The offence is 
not attracted even if one has to assume that action of the 
accused would amount to revision clearly mandates that 
tickets have to be procured by the offender.”
11.	 The view taken by the Kerala High Court appears to be that 
Section 143 is somewhat outdated in the age of purchasing tickets 
using the internet. It has, in essence, read down Section 143 to 
state that one can conduct a business of procuring and supplying 
tickets without the authorisation of the railways as long as it is done 
through the internet. The order also observes that as the tickets were 
procured in the name of genuine passengers, it cannot be said that 
Mathew had contravened Section 143. 
506
12.	 In the connected appeals, the Madras High Court refused to quash 
the criminal appeal and ratiocinated its view in the following words:
“9. …This Court is of the considered view that the decision 
held by the High Court of Kerala holding that the said 
provision was enacted much prior to the creation of e-tickets 
and the petitioner therein was not carrying a business of 
procuring and supplying of tickets for travel on the Railway 
reserved tickets through internet and therefore online was 
not prohibited, whereas in the case on hand, the offence 
committed by the petitioner is completely different from 
the aforesaid case. The petitioner himself created more 
than 200 user IDs, procured tickets and supplied to the 
passengers. Further, in the said business of procuring 
and purchasing tickets on Railways were for the benefit 
of Rs.150/- for sleeper and Rs.250/- for A/C per head in 
addition to ticket fare as service charge from his customers, 
prohibited by the provisions under Section 143 of the Act. 
In fact, recommendation of the e-tickets scheme no way 
alters the position of purchase of tickets, as agent or the 
customer can book e-tickets by creating ID in their name. 
But the authorized agent cannot create other user IDs for 
the purpose of procuring tickets for illegal gain. Therefore, 
judgement cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner 
is not applicable to the case on hand. That apart, the 
crime is under investigation and only after investigation, 
the respondent can unearth the truth.”
13.	 The Madras High Court acknowledged that Ramesh was an 
authorised agent under Section 143; however, it refused to quash the 
criminal proceedings on the ground that such authorisation did not 
empower the appellant to create multiple user IDs for the purpose 
of procuring tickets for illegal gain. On the ground that Ramesh was 
only authorised to sell tickets through his own account and was not 
specifically authorised to create multiple user IDs, the Madras High 
Court dismissed Ramesh’s petition seeking quashing of the criminal 
proceedings. 
Analysis
14.	 The appeals before us, although have different factual matrices, 
involve a common question of law. Having bestowed serious 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
507
Inspector, Railway Protection Force, Kottayam v.  
Mathew K Cherian & Anr.
consideration and thought, we find ourselves in a curious position 
where our interference seems to be warranted in both sets of 
appeals. 
15.	 In order to settle the controversy in the present lis, the ambit and scope 
of Section 143 of the Act has to be noticed and comprehended. The 
question before us is whether the act of creating fake/multiple user 
IDs by an individual, who may or may not be an authorized railway 
agent, with the intention to procure and supply online tickets through 
IRCTC portal would constitute an offence under Section 143 of the 
Act? In addition to the scope of Section 143, we need to analyse 
whether the two criminal proceedings in question did merit quashing 
by the respective High Court. 
16.	 At this stage, it would be beneficial to read Section 143 of the Act. 
It reads:
143. Penalty for unauthorised carrying on of business of 
procuring and supplying of railway ticket-
(1) if any person, not being a railway servant or an 
agent authorised in this behalf,-
(a) carries on the business of procuring and supplying 
tickets for travel on a railway or from reserved 
accommodation for journey in a train; or
(b) purchases or sells or attempts to purchase or sell 
tickets with a view to carrying on any such business 
either by himself or by any other person,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years or with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both, 
and shall also forfeit the tickets which he do so 
procures, supplies, purchases, sells or attempts to 
purchase or sell:
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate 
reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in judgment 
of the court, such punishment shall not be less than 
imprisonment for a term-of one month or a fine of 
five thousand rupees.
508
(2) Whoever abets any offence punishable under 
this section shall, whether or not such offence is 
committed, be punishable with the same punishment 
as is provided for the offence.
(emphasis supplied)
17.	 The purport and objective of Section 143 of the Act is to restrict entities 
which are not under the disciplinary control of or are not authorised 
by the railways to conduct the business of procurement and supply of 
railway tickets. Railway servants and authorised agents stand apart 
since, on its own terms, Section 143 has no application to them. 
18.	 The whole scheme of e-ticketing was introduced for the convenience 
and betterment of the passenger’s experience of travelling on a train, 
due to which the procurement and supply of these e-tickets, rightfully 
so, is highly regulated. In the additional affidavit of the appellant in 
the lead appeal, Rules and Regulations for Reserved Bail e-Ticketing 
Service Providers (PSPs/RSPs) have been annexed which reflect the 
idea of protecting the consumer and strictly prohibit using personal/
fraudulent IDs to book tickets for commercial purposes. These rules, 
further, bar sharing of the credentials by these authorised agents. 
Also, the perils of hoarding of resources by a select few are widely 
known and has to be kept in mind while adjudicating the present lis. 
19.	 IRCTC has limited the number of tickets which can be reserved on 
one personal user ID at 12 per month (24 per month with a user ID 
which is Aadhaar verified). Mathew, it is alleged, had created hundreds 
of fake user IDs to sell tickets without any authorisation from the 
railways. Although the internet and e-tickets were unknown in India 
when the Act was brought into force, this conduct of Mathew (who 
is neither a railway servant nor an authorised agent) nevertheless 
attracts criminality under Section 143(1)(a) of the Act. 
20.	 The Kerala High Court allowed the quashing petition filed by Mathew 
on the ground that the Act was enacted before the advent of internet 
and e-tickets and the lawmakers could not have envisioned sale of 
tickets, online. We find this line of reasoning of the High Court to 
be plainly erroneous.
21.	 Statutory interpretation has to follow certain principles which have 
been formulated through legal precedents. No court can refuse to 
enforce a provision on the sole basis of the provision predating any 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
509
Inspector, Railway Protection Force, Kottayam v.  
Mathew K Cherian & Anr.
subsequent development regarding the ticketing process. If it can be 
demonstrated that a statutory provision is broad enough to envelop 
the subsequent developments, even if the developments were not 
envisioned by the legislature, the provision would stay operational. 
This principle was expounded by this Court in Senior Electric 
Inspector v. Laxminarayan Chopra12 in the following words:
“…This Court in construing the words ‘sale of goods’ in 
Entry 48, List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Government 
of India Act, 1935, accepted the aforesaid principle in 
State of Madras v. Gannon Dunkerley & Co., (Madras) 
Ltd. [(1959) SCR 379] and restated it at p. 416 thus:
‘The principle of these decisions is that when, after the 
enactment of a legislation, new facts and situations 
arise which could not have been in its contemplation, 
the statutory provisions could properly be applied 
to them if the words thereof are in a broad sense 
capable of containing them.’
The legal position may be summarized thus: The 
maxim contemporanea expositio as laid down by Coke 
was applied to construing ancient statutes, but not 
to interpreting Acts which are comparatively modern. 
There is a good reason for this change in the mode of 
interpretation. The fundamental rule of construction is the 
same whether the Court is asked to construe a provision of 
an ancient statute or that of a modern one, namely, what 
is the expressed intention of the Legislature. It is perhaps 
difficult to attribute to a legislative body functioning in a 
static society that its intention was couched in terms of 
considerable breadth so as to take within its sweep the 
future developments comprehended by the phraseology 
used. It is more reasonable to confine its intention only 
to the circumstances obtaining at the time the law was 
made. But in a modern progressive society it would be 
unreasonable to confine the intention of a Legislature to 
the meaning attributable to the word used at the time the 
law was made, for a modern Legislature making laws to 
12	
[1962] 3 SCR 146 : AIR 1962 SC 159
510
govern a society which is fast moving must be presumed to 
be aware of an enlarged meaning the same concept might 
attract with the march of time and with the revolutionary 
changes brought about in social, economic, political and 
scientific and other fields of human activity. Indeed, unless 
a contrary intention appears, an interpretation should be 
given to the words used to take in new facts and situations, 
if the words are capable of comprehending them. We 
cannot, therefore, agree with the learned Judges of the High 
Court that the maxim contemporanea expositio could be 
invoked in construing the word ‘telegraph line’ in the Act.”
(emphasis supplied)
22.	 The aforenoted decision has been followed in a relatively recent 
decision of this Court in Dharani Sugars and Chemicals Ltd. v. 
Union of India.13 This Court, further, noticed an English decision in 
Comdel Commodities Ltd. v. Siporex Trade S.A. (No. 2)14 distilling 
the principle as follows:
‘… When a change in social conditions produces a novel 
situation, which was not in contemplation at the time 
when a statute was first enacted, there can be no a priori 
assumption that the enactment does not apply to the 
new circumstances. If the language of the enactment 
is wide enough to extend to those circumstances, 
there is no reason why it should not apply.’
23.	 Bearing in mind the above principles, we may now proceed to consider 
a couple of decisions of this Court on the rule of literal interpretation. 
24.	 In Jugalkishore Saraf v. Raw Cotton Co. Ltd.,15 Hon’ble S.R. Das J. 
(as His Lordship then was), speaking for the Court, held as follows:
“6…The cardinal rule of construction of statutes is to read 
the statutes literally, that is, by giving to the words their 
ordinary, natural and grammatical meaning. If, however, 
such a reading leads to absurdity and the words are 
susceptible of another meaning, the Court may adopt 
13	
[2019] 6 SCR 307 : (2019) 5 SCC 480
14	
(1990) 2 All E R 552 (HL)
15	
[1955] 1 SCR 1369 : AIR 1955 SC 376
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
511
Inspector, Railway Protection Force, Kottayam v.  
Mathew K Cherian & Anr.
the same. But if no such alternative construction is 
possible, the Court must adopt the ordinary rule of literal 
interpretation. In the present case, the literal construction 
leads to no apparent absurdity and therefore, there can 
be no compelling reason for departing from that golden 
rule of construction.”
25.	 A reference can also be made to the decision of not too distant an 
origin. In Ansal Properties & Industries Ltd. v. State of Haryana,16 
the rule of literal construction has been reiterated in the following 
words: 
“39. If the legislature had intended that the licensee is 
required to transfer the land and also to construct the 
buildings on it or to make payment for such construction, 
the legislature would have made specific provisions laying 
down such conditions explicitly and in clear words in 
which event the provisions would have been worded in 
altogether different words and terms. It is a well-settled 
principle in law that the court cannot read anything into a 
statutory provision which is plain and unambiguous. The 
language employed in a statute is determinative factor of 
legislative intent. If the language of the enactment is clear 
and unambiguous, it would not be proper for the courts to 
add any words thereto and evolve some legislative intent, 
not found in the statute.”
(emphasis supplied)
26.	 From the above decisions, it is quite clear that if the language of the 
particular statute under consideration is clear and unambiguous, it is 
not for the courts to add to or delete any words from the statute in 
the guise of ascertaining what could have been the legislative intent. 
27.	 Section 143, on its plain language, prohibits any person, other than 
a railway servant or an authorised agent, to conduct the business 
of procurement and supply of railway tickets. The provision does 
not specify the modalities of the procurement and supply. Hence, if 
we read the section and give its contents the natural and ordinary 
meaning, keeping in mind the objective and purpose of the legislation, 
16	
[2009] 1 SCR 553 : (2009) 3 SCC 553
512
as discussed above, it admits of no doubt that this provision 
criminalises unauthorised procurement and supply, irrespective of 
the mode of procurement and supply. 
28.	 We are further of the considered opinion that the mere fact of 
the system of e-reservation and e-tickets being introduced after 
the enactment of the Act does not render the provision in Section 
143 toothless to combat the illegal sale of e-tickets. Section 143, 
importantly, makes no distinction between physical and online sale 
of tickets. The mischief that the provision seeks to remedy is that 
there should not be illegal and unauthorised procurement and sale 
of tickets, whatever be the mode – physical or online. The Kerala 
High Court seems to have missed this aspect.
29.	 There has been a major technological development in the last three 
decades by reason whereof a significant number of services provided 
by the Governments are available online. Electronic and internet 
services have not only become indispensable but offer significant 
advantages to the public. Having regard to the comprehensive 
phraseology employed in Section 143, the net of its coverage is 
wide enough to encompass regulation of the conduct of ticketing 
agents and to protect the public from unscrupulous elements trying 
to defraud them by sale of valueless tickets. 
30.	 The Kerala High Court made the distinction between “procure” and 
“purchase”. It held that the tickets were “purchased” by genuine 
passengers. The tickets were not sold by Mathew, rather, the tickets 
were sold by IRCTC in the names of the passengers. Hence, it cannot 
be said that Mathew was procuring the tickets. This reasoning, in 
our view, is flawed and unsustainable. Travel agents, by and large, 
do not purchase tickets in their own name and then sell it to the 
passengers. Tickets are procured in the name of the passengers 
by these agents in lieu of a commission on the price thereof. Taking 
active steps, however faithfully, in order to acquire and provide 
tickets to third parties but without being a railway servant or an 
authorised agent would attract the expression ‘procure and supply’ 
as in Section 143.
31.	 We agree with the prosecution that Section 143, a penal provision, 
has been enacted to tackle a social crime. The Indian Railways is a 
keystone of our country’s infrastructure. It carries around 673 crore 
passengers annually and has a tremendous impact on the economy 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
513
Inspector, Railway Protection Force, Kottayam v.  
Mathew K Cherian & Anr.
of this country. Any effort to disrupt the integrity and stability of the 
ticketing system has to be stopped on its tracks. 
32.	 The second issue before us is whether these criminal proceedings 
in the two appeals should be quashed. This Court has dealt with the 
issue of quashing numerous times. Reference in this connection may 
be made to the decisions in R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab,17 State 
of W.B. v. Swapan Kumar Guha,18 State of Haryana v. Bhajan 
Lal,19 Pepsi Foods Ltd. v. Special Judicial Magistrate,20 and Amit 
Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander.21
33.	 The principles which can be extrapolated from these precedents are 
that quashing of a criminal proceeding can take place, inter alia, if the 
first information report does not reveal a crime or if the fact situation 
be such that continuance of the criminal proceedings would result in 
abuse of the process causing injustice to the accused. This power 
of quashing, however, is not unfettered or unlimited and as the old 
adage goes - “judicial discretion has to be exercised judiciously”. 
34.	 In the lead appeal, the facts of the case prima facie reveal the 
commission of an offence under Section 143 of the Act. Mathew, 
without the authorisation of the railways, was carrying on a business 
of procurement and supply of railway tickets. The allegations against 
Mathew taken at face value fulfil the elements required under 
Section 143(1)(a) of the Act; hence, the threshold for quashing has 
not been met in this case. 
35.	 In the connected appeals, Ramesh was an authorised agent of the 
railways carrying on the business of procurement and supply of 
railway tickets. Section 143 only deals with the actions of unauthorised 
persons and does not mandate a procedure to be followed by the 
authorised agents for procuring or supplying tickets to its customers. 
The nature of allegations against Ramesh in the connected appeal, 
though serious, Section 143 would not be attracted insofar as he 
is concerned. 
17	
[1960] 3 SCR 311 : 1960 SCC OnLine SC 21
18	
[1982] 3 SCR 121 : (1982) 1 SCC 561
19	
[1992] Supp. 3 SCR 735 : (1992) Supp. 1 SCC 335
20	
[1997] Supp. 5 SCR 12 : (1998) 5 SCC 749
21	
[2012] 7 SCR 988 : (2012) 9 SCC 460
514
36.	 That apart, Section 143 does not criminalise creating multiple user IDs. 
Penal provisions have to be read strictly and narrowly as a general 
rule. Section 143, by being completely silent on creation of multiple 
user IDs, penalises the actions of only the unauthorised agents and 
not unauthorised actions of the authorised agents. Thus, even if the 
facts disclosed in the first information report are taken at face value, 
commission of an offence cannot be attributed to Ramesh. Any 
breach has to be remedied by civil action and not criminal action. 
37.	 To sum up, Mathew not being an authorised agent has to face the 
proceedings against him while Ramesh, being an authorised agent, 
cannot be proceeded against under Section 143 of the Act for alleged 
breach of any of the terms and conditions of the contract. If, at all, 
he would be liable to face civil action. 
38.	 In our view, for the foregoing reasons, the lead appeal deserves 
to be allowed and consequently, the criminal proceedings against 
Mathew need to be restored. It is ordered accordingly.
39.	 The proceedings against Mathew shall be taken to its logical 
conclusion, in accordance with law. Observations made by us 
hereinabove are for the purpose of a decision on the lead appeal 
and may not be construed as an expression of opinion on the merits 
of the prosecution’s case. 
40.	 The connected appeals are allowed as well, but the criminal 
proceedings against Ramesh are hereby quashed.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan