[2025] 5 S.C.R. 707 : 2025 INSC 746
Mohammed Asarudeen 
v. 
Union of India & Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 2443 of 2025)
06 May 2025
[Abhay S. Oka* and Ujjal Bhuyan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the Special Court while dealing with an application under 
sub-section 2 of s.44 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 
made in respect of a large number of witnesses, recorded the 
satifaction which is required to be recorded in terms of sub-section 2 
of s.44 of UAPA. Whether the satisfaction as required by sub-section 2 
of s.44 of UAPA was recorded qua an individual witness.
Headnotes†
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 – Sub-section 2 
of s.44 – National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 – s.17 – 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.173(6) – Appellant 
was tried by the Special Court for the National Investigation 
Agency cases – Charge-sheet was filed – An application was 
made by the Special Public Prosecutor of the NIA, invoking 
powers of the Special Court u/s.44 of the UAPA, r/w. s.17 of 
the NIA Act, 2008 r/w. s.173(6) of CrPC, for the protection 
of witnesses, which was allowed – The order of the Special 
Court was challenged before the High Court – The result of the 
impugned order passed by the High Court is that, in relation 
to the witnesses mentioned in clause 1 of paragraph 6 of the 
order of the Special Court, the accused will not be entitled 
to the copies of the statements of such witnesses recorded 
u/s.161 of the CrPC even after examination-in-chief of the said 
witnesses is recorded – Correctness:
Held: On plain reading of sub-section 2 of s.44 of the UAPA, the 
Court has to apply its mind in relation to danger to a particular 
witness – An omnibus application cannot be made by the Special 
Public Prosecutor for the grant of protection under sub-section 
2 of s.44 for all witnesses or a number of witnesses – Even if 
an application is made in respect of more than one witness, 
* Author
708
Supreme Court Reports
specific averments in relation to every witness must be made in 
the application – In view of this Court, sub-section 2 of s.44 of 
the UAPA (sub-section 2 of s.17 of NIA) must be strictly complied 
with, as the exercise of the power may affect the right of the 
accused to defend – On facts, the Special Court was dealing 
with an application where the prayer under sub-section 2 of s.44 
of UAPA was made in respect of a large number of witnesses – 
The Special Court has not considered the case of each witness 
separately regarding the possible dangers to their lives – The Court 
has also not recorded satisfaction based on material that the life 
of a particular witness is in danger – A very general observation 
has been made that, in the interests of justice, the Court feels that 
the identity of the witnesses can be hidden till the examination in 
chief of the witnesses is recorded – The order of the Special Court 
cannot be sustained – The first satisfaction, which is required to be 
recorded in terms of sub-section 2 of s.44 of UAPA, has not been 
recorded – Similarly, the observation of the High Court completely 
ignores the second part of sub-section 2 of s.44 of the UAPA – 
Both the Courts have lost sight of the fact that the satisfaction as 
required by sub-section 2 of s.44 of UAPA has to be recorded qua 
an individual witness – Therefore, both the orders are set aside. 
[Paras 11, 12, 14]
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 – Sub-section 2 of 
s.44 – Recording of satisfaction:
Held: The first condition precedent for the exercise of powers 
under sub-section 2 of s.44 of UAPA is the recording of the 
satisfaction by the Special Court that the life of the concerned 
witness is in danger – This satisfaction must be recorded based on 
the material available before the Special Court – The extent and 
the nature of the material required to record such satisfaction will 
depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case – Since  
sub-section 2 of s.44 of the UAPA is an exception to the general 
rule, the condition precedent for the exercise of power of recording 
a clear satisfaction based on material as stated must be complied 
with – After recording the satisfaction, the second stage comes 
into play – It is not that in every case that after such satisfaction is 
recorded, the Court can pass an order prohibiting the prosecution 
from providing a copy of the entire statement of the prosecution 
witnesses till the conclusion of the trial – The Court has to apply 
its mind considering the material on record, what kind of measures 
should be adopted for keeping the identity and address of such 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
709
Mohammed Asarudeen v. Union of India & Ors.
a witness, secret – While deciding what kind of measures should 
be adopted, the Court must record brief reasons. [Paras 9, 10]
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 – ss.44 – National 
Investigation Agency Act, 2008 – s.17 – Witness Protection 
Scheme, 2018 – cl.2(c) – It was contended by the State that 
when application under sub-section 2 of s.44 of the UAPA or 
sub-section 2 of s.17 of NIA is heard by the Special Court, the 
accused have no right of hearing – Correctness:
Held: On the face of it, sub-section 2 of s.44 of UAPA and  
sub-section 2 of s.17 of the NIA Act does not exclude the principles 
of natural justice – The accused has a right of hearing on the 
application under sub-section 2 of s.44 of the UAPA, but obviously, 
till orders are passed by the Court on the application and subject 
to such orders, the accused is not entitled to know the identity 
of the witnesses in respect of whom the application is made – If, 
during the pendency of the application, the identity of the witness is 
disclosed in any manner, the very purpose of the power conferred 
on sub-section 2 of s.44 of the UAPA will be lost. [Para 21]
Case Law Cited
Mahender Chawla & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. [2018] 14 SCR 
627 : (2019) 14 SCC 615 – referred to.
List of Acts
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; National Investigation 
Agency Act, 2008; Witness Protection Scheme, 2018.
List of Keywords
Protection of Witness; Principles of Natural Justice; Right of 
hearing; Material produced regarding the threat perception;  
Sub-section 2 of Section 44 of UAPA; Omnibus application; Right 
of accuse to defend.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
2443 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 21.10.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras in CRLOP No. 2872 of 2024
710
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Shoeb Alam, Sr. Adv., D. Kumanan, Sheikh F. Kalia, A. Noufal.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Suryaprakash V. Raju, A.S.G., Zoheb Hussain, Annam Venkatesh, 
Arkaj Kumar, Aaditya Shankar Dixit, Arvind Kumar Sharma, B. 
Mohan, Gaurav Sarkar.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Abhay. S. Oka, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
Heard learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant and learned 
Additional Solicitor General appearing for the first respondent. The 
appellant is accused No. 1. The appellant is being tried by the Special 
Court for the National Investigation Agency (hereinafter referred to 
as ‘the NIA’) cases in Chennai. Initially, an offence was registered 
under Sections 341, 294(b) and 307 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 
(for short, ‘the IPC’). Subsequently, Sections 120B, 143, 147, 148, 
302 read with 149 of the IPC and Section 15 read with Sections 16, 
18, 18B, 19 and 20 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 
(for short, ‘the UAPA’) were added. Upon completion of investigation/
filing of charge-sheet, an application was made by the Special 
Public Prosecutor of the NIA, invoking powers of the Special Court 
under Section 44 of the UAPA, read with Section 17 of the National 
Investigation Agency Act, 2008 (for short, ‘NIA Act’) read with Section 
173(6) of Cr.P.C., for the protection of witnesses. The provisions of 
Section 44 of the UAPA, as well as Section 17 of the NIA Act, are 
pari materia. In this case, we are concerned with sub-section 2 of 
Section 44 of the UAPA. Section 44 of the UAPA reads thus:
“4. Protection of witnesses.—
(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the 
proceedings under this Act may, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, be held in camera if the court so desires.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
711
Mohammed Asarudeen v. Union of India & Ors.
(2)A court, if on an application made by a witness in any 
proceeding before it or by the Public Prosecutor in relation 
to such witness or on its own motion, is satisfied that the 
life of such witness is in danger, it may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, take such measures as it deems fit for 
keeping the identity and address of such witness secret.
(3)In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the provisions of sub-section (2), the measures which a 
court may take under that sub-section may include—
(a)the holding of the proceedings at a place to be decided 
by the court;
(b)the avoiding of the mention of the name and address 
of the witness in its orders or judgments or in any records 
of the case accessible to public;
(c)the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity 
and address of the witness are not disclosed;
(d)a decision that it is in the public interest to order that 
all or any of the proceedings pending before such a court 
shall not be published in any manner.
(4)Any person who contravenes any decision or direction 
issued under sub-section (3), shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, 
and shall also be liable to fine.”
3.	
Sub-section 2 of Section 17 of the NIA Act is identical. The prayer 
made by the Special Public Prosecutor in the application reads thus:
“(1) to issue necessary order or orders for not supplying 
of copies of the statement recorded under Section 161 
of Cr.P.C. in respect of Protected Witnesses to the 
accused persons or their advocate/legal counsel under the 
provisions of section 17 of the NIA Act, 2008 and section 
44 of the UA(P) Act, 1967 r/w 173(6) Cr.P.C., in view of 
safety and security of the witnesses, until such time this 
Hon’ble Court deems fit; and to provide copy of statements 
of those witnesses, who are not treated protected witnesses 
to the accused person or their advocate/legal aid;”
712
Supreme Court Reports
4.	
By the order dated 21st August, 2019, the application was allowed 
by the Special Court by passing the following order:
“6. In the result, this petition is allowed and ordered as 
under:
(1) The petitioner/prosecuting agency is permitted to hide 
the identity and address of the witnesses, namely L.W. 
10, L.W. 11, L.W.12, L.W.19, L.W.20, L.W.21, L.W.22, 
L.W.34, L.W.35, L.W.36, L.W.37, L.W.38, L.W.39, L.W.40 
and L.W.70 mentioned in Annexure-A to the charge sheet 
and in the statements of the said witnesses recorded u/s 
161 of Cr.P.C. in the copies to be furnished to the accused 
persons.
(2) The petitioner is directed to submit one separate set 
of true copy of such hided copy of statements of those 
witnesses and the Annexure-A to the charge-sheet, to 
the Court, along with the copies to be supplied to the 
accused persons, to keep with the case-records. Upon 
such submission, the office of this Court is directed to keep 
the original of Annexure-A to the charge-sheet, and the 
statements u/s 161 of Cr.P.C. of the said witnesses in a 
sealed cover separately under safe custody of this Court.
(3) The original statements u/s 161 of Cr.P.C. in respect 
of those witnesses will be opened from the sealed cover 
on the date of examination of the concerned witness and 
after examination-in-chief is over, the statement of such 
witness shall be supplied to the accused immediately.”
5.	
The order of the Special Court was challenged by the first respondent 
through the NIA before the High Court. By the impugned judgment, 
the High Court held that clauses (1) and (2) of paragraph 6 of the 
order of the Special Court needs no interference. However, the 
High Court interfered with clause (3) of paragraph 6 by setting it 
aside. The result of the impugned order is that, in relation to the 
witnesses mentioned in clause 1 of paragraph 6 of the order of the 
Special Court, the accused will not be entitled to the copies of the 
statements of such witnesses recorded under Section 161 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the Cr.P.C.) even after 
examination-in-chief of the said witnesses is recorded.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
713
Mohammed Asarudeen v. Union of India & Ors.
6.	
The submission of the learned senior counsel appearing for the 
appellant is that the satisfaction which is required to be recorded 
in terms of sub-section 2 of Section 44 of UAPA and sub-section 2 
of Section 17 of the NIA Act, has not been recorded by the Special 
Court. He submitted that, notwithstanding the failure of the Special 
Court to record the satisfaction, as clause (3) of paragraph 6 of 
the order of the Special Court protected the appellant, he did not 
challenge the order. 
7.	
Learned ASG submitted that the satisfaction required to be recorded 
in terms of sub-section 2 of Section 44 of the UAPA and sub-
section 2 of Section 17 of the NIA Act has been clearly recorded in 
paragraph 5 of the order of the Special Court. It is submitted that in 
any case, the appellant accepted the order of the Special Court as 
he did not challenge the same. He submitted that the Special Court 
could have always directed that the copies of the statements of the 
protected witnesses should not be given to the accused even after 
the examination-in-chief of the said witnesses is over. 
8.	
We have considered the submissions. The normal rule is that the 
accused is entitled to the copies of the statements of witnesses 
recorded by the police during the investigation unless the concerned 
Court exercises the power under sub-section 6 of Section 173 of 
the Cr.P.C. read with first proviso of Section 207 of the Cr.P.C. We 
have already quoted Section 44 of the UAPA. Sub-section 1 of 
Section 44 of the UAPA starts with a non-obstante clause which 
permits the Court to conduct the trial in camera for reasons to be 
recorded. The same is the provision of sub-section 1 of Section 17 
of the NIA Act. It is pertinent to note that out of four sub-sections of 
Section 44 (Section 17 of the NIA), only sub-section 1 starts with a 
non-obstante clause. 
9.	
Sub-section 2 of Section 44 of the UAPA can be invoked by a 
prosecution witness or by the Public Prosecutor. In a given case, 
even the Special Court can exercise this power suo motu. The first 
condition precedent for the exercise of powers under sub-section 2 of 
Section 44 of UAPA is the recording of the satisfaction by the Special 
Court that the life of the concerned witness is in danger. Obviously, 
this satisfaction must be recorded based on the material available 
before the Special Court. The extent and the nature of the material 
required to record such satisfaction will depend upon the facts and 
714
Supreme Court Reports
circumstances of each case. Since sub-section 2 of Section 44 of 
the UAPA is an exception to the general rule, the condition precedent 
for the exercise of power of recording a clear satisfaction based on 
material as stated above must be complied with.
10.	 After recording the satisfaction, the second stage comes into play. It 
is not that in every case that after such satisfaction is recorded, the 
Court can pass an order prohibiting the prosecution from providing 
a copy of the entire statement of the prosecution witnesses till the 
conclusion of the trial. The Court has to apply its mind considering 
the material on record, what kind of measures should be adopted 
for keeping the identity and address of such a witness, secret. While 
deciding what kind of measures should be adopted, the Court must 
record brief reasons. 
11.	 On plain reading of sub-section 2 of Section 44 of the UAPA, the Court 
has to apply its mind in relation to danger to a particular witness. An 
omnibus application cannot be made by the Special Public Prosecutor 
for the grant of protection under sub-section 2 of Section 44 for all 
witnesses or a number of witnesses. Even if an application is made 
in respect of more than one witness, specific averments in relation 
to every witness must be made in the application. In our view, sub-
section 2 of Section 44 of the UAPA (sub-section 2 of Section 17 
of NIA) must be strictly complied with, as the exercise of the power 
may affect the right of the accused to defend.
12.	 In the facts of this case, we find that the Special Court was dealing 
with an application where the prayer under sub-section 2 of Section 
44 of UAPA was made in respect of a large number of witnesses. 
The Special Court has not considered the case of each witness 
separately regarding the possible dangers to their lives. The Court 
has also not recorded satisfaction based on material that the life of a 
particular witness is in danger. A very general observation has been 
made in paragraph 5 that, in the interests of justice, the Court feels 
that the identity of the witnesses can be hidden till the examination 
in chief of the witnesses is recorded. According to us, the order of 
the Special Court cannot be sustained as even the first satisfaction, 
which is required to be recorded in terms of sub-section 2 of Section 
44 of UAPA, has not been recorded.
13.	 Now we come to the impugned judgment of the High Court. The 
relevant part of paragraph 21 of the said order reads thus:
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
715
Mohammed Asarudeen v. Union of India & Ors.
“21. Once the Court formed an opinion that the witnesses 
are to be protected, the said protection must be in complete 
form and it cannot be diluted at any circumstances. Once 
the statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. in respect of those 
protected witnesses are kept in a sealed cover, it cannot 
be opened after examination of the concerned witnesses 
and after examination in chief is over. It cannot be opened 
for the purpose of handing over to the accused persons. It 
is to be opened only for the purpose of- dealing with the 
case by the court and for disposal of the case.”
14.	 This observation of the High Court completely ignores the second 
part of sub-section 2 of Section 44 of the UAPA. Even assuming 
that a satisfaction was recorded that there was a danger to the life 
of a witness, the Court was required to apply its mind to decide 
what measures should be taken to protect the witness as regards 
his identity, address and name, etc. The Court must apply its mind 
to decide what measures should be taken and record brief reasons 
for taking such measures. Therefore, in every case where the first 
part of satisfaction under sub-section 2 of Section 44 is recorded, 
the Court cannot pass a blanket order as suggested by the High 
Court in paragraph 21. The Special Court must be conscious of the 
fact that sub-section 2 of Section 44 of UAPA is an exception to the 
normal rule. Therefore, we disapprove the findings recorded by the 
Special Court and the High Court to that extent.
15.	 In any case, both the Courts have lost sight of the fact that the 
satisfaction as required by sub-section 2 of Section 44 of UAPA has 
to be recorded qua an individual witness. We, therefore, set aside 
both the orders and dispose of the application made by NIA on 2nd 
August, 2019 (Annexure - ‘P-3’).
16.	 This order will not preclude either the prosecution witnesses or the 
Special Public Prosecutor from invoking the powers of the Special 
Court under sub-section 2 of Section 44 of the UAPA and sub-section 
2 of Section 17 of the NIA Act. If such applications are made, the 
Court will decide the same in accordance with law in the light of 
what we have held in this judgment.
17.	 As far as the material produced regarding the threat perception is 
concerned, it is for the Court to decide whether such material should 
be disclosed to the accused. In a given case, the Court may decline 
to disclose the material to the accused.
716
Supreme Court Reports
18.	 We grant time of eight weeks to the Special Public Prosecutor to 
file a proper application to invoke provisions of Section 44(2) and 
Section 17(2).
19.	 If such applications are made in relation to particular witnesses 
within eight weeks from today, till the disposal of the applications, 
subject to the orders which may be passed by the Special Court on 
the applications, the identity of the witnesses shall not be disclosed 
in any manner.
20.	 It is obvious that we have made no adjudication on the factual 
controversy, as the Special Court itself has not made any adjudication 
about the existence of threat perception in relation to the witnesses 
mentioned in the application.
21.	 At this stage, learned ASG submitted that when application under 
sub-section 2 of Section 44 of the UAPA or sub-section 2 of Section 
17 of NIA is heard by the Special Court, the accused have no right 
of hearing. He placed reliance on the Witness Protection Scheme, 
2018, (for short, ‘the Scheme’) which has been approved by this 
Court in the case of Mahender Chawla & Ors. vs. Union of India & 
Ors.1. He also drew our attention to the fact that this Court has given 
its imprimatur to the scheme, as stated in paragraph 36 of the said 
judgment. We have perused the entire scheme. The Scheme does 
not deal with the powers of the Court at all. The scheme creates a 
machinery in the form of a competent authority as defined in clause 
2(c), which is the Standing Committee in each district, chaired by 
the District and Sessions Judge, with the head of the police in the 
district as a member and the head of the prosecution in the district 
as its Member Secretary. Clause 9 contemplates the competent 
authority examining the request for seeking identity protection of a 
witness. Clause 9 itself contemplates a hearing of the application. 
However, this hearing is conducted by the competent authority and 
not by the Court. On the face of it, we do not find that sub-section 2 
of Section 44 of UAPA and sub-section 2 of Section 17 of the NIA Act 
exclude the principles of natural justice. As observed earlier, it is for 
the Court to decide whether the nature of the material regarding the 
threat perception relied upon, should be disclosed to the accused. 
1	
(2019) 14 SCC 615
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
717
Mohammed Asarudeen v. Union of India & Ors.
The Court has a power to direct that the material should not be 
disclosed to the accused. The accused has a right of hearing on 
the application under sub-section 2 of Section 44 of the UAPA, but 
obviously, till orders are passed by the Court on the application 
and subject to such orders, the accused is not entitled to know 
the identity of the witnesses in respect of whom the application is 
made. If, during the pendency of the application, the identity of the 
witness is disclosed in any manner, the very purpose of the power 
conferred on sub-section 2 of Section 44 of the UAPA will be lost. 
Subject to what we have observed above, we reject the submission 
of the learned ASG. 
22.	 The appeal is accordingly allowed on the above terms.
23.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan