[2025] 4 S.C.R. 1 : 2025 INSC 315
K.S. Mehta 
v. 
M/s Morgan Securities and Credits Pvt. Ltd.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1105 of 2025)
04 March 2025
[B.V. Nagarathna and Satish Chandra Sharma,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court was justified in dismissing the petitions 
filed under Section 482 CrPC for quashing of criminal proceedings.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 — Whether the High Court 
is justified in dismissing the petitions sought for the quashing 
of criminal proceedings initiated against the Appellant(s) 
under Section 138 read with Section 141 of the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881 — Correctness:
Held: The dispute stems from an Inter-Corporate Deposit (“ICD”) 
agreement executed between the accused company and the 
Respondent – Notedly, the Appellants were the Director of 
the company but neither attended the board meeting wherein 
the said transaction was approved, nor were they signatories 
to the agreement or any related financial instruments — The 
Appellant(s) directorship was non-executive and limited to 
corporate governance oversight in compliance with SEBI 
regulations — Subsequently, both the appellants resigned from 
the Company — It is a trite principle that non-executive and 
independent director(s) cannot be held liable under Section 138 
read with Section 141 of the NI Act unless specific allegations 
demonstrate their direct involvement in affairs of the company at 
the relevant time — The Appellant(s) neither issued nor signed the 
dishonored cheques nor had any role in their execution – There 
is no material on record to suggest that they were responsible for 
the issuance of the cheques in question — The mere fact that 
Appellant(s) attended board meetings does not suffice to impose 
financial liability on the Appellant(s), as such attendance does 
not automatically translate into control over financial operations – 
* Author
2
Thus, the Appellant(s) cannot be held vicariously liable under 
Section 141 of the NI Act – Therefore, criminal proceedings 
against the Appellant(s) are quashed. [4, 10, 17, 18, 19]
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Director’s liability under Section 141 of NI Act; Vicarious Liability; 
Non-Executive Director’s liability.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1105 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 28.11.2023 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in CRLMC No. 1643 of 2019
With
Criminal Appeal Nos. 1106 and 1107 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Siddharth Aggarwal, Vishwajit Singh, Sr. Advs., Suman Jyoti 
Khaitan, Vikas Kumar, Ayush Shrivastava, Ayush Kapur, Vihaan 
Kumar, Pankaj Singh, Ms. Praanshoo Goyal, Ms. Ridhima Singh.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Vikramjeet Banerjee, A.S.G., Mukesh Kumar Maroria, Annirudh 
Sharma Ii, B K Satija, Ms. Diksha Rai, Ms. Sakshi Kakkar,  
Ms. Satvika Thakur, Simran Mehta, Ms. Aruna Gupta, Ajay Pal Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Satish Chandra Sharma, J. 
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeals arise from the common Impugned Judgment 
and Order dated 28.11.2023, passed by the High Court of Delhi at 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
3
K.S. Mehta v. M/s Morgan Securities and Credits Pvt. Ltd.
New Delhi (the “High Court”), whereby the High Court dismissed the 
petitions filed under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (the “CrPC”). The petitions sought the quashing of criminal 
proceedings initiated against the Appellant(s) under Section 138 read 
with Section 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (the “NI Act”).
BACKGROUND
3.	
The Appellant(s) K.S. Mehta, and Basant Kumar Goswami, were 
appointed as directors of M/s Blue Coast Hotels & Resorts Ltd. 
(Accused No. 1/Company) at different times. K.S. Mehta was 
appointed as an additional director on 29.06.2001, while Basant 
Kumar Goswami was appointed as a director on 16.04.1998. 
Appellant(s) were designated as non-executive director in compliance 
with clause 49 of the Listing Agreement prescribed by the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India (the “SEBI”). Their role was confined 
to governance oversight without any executive authority or financial 
decision-making power in the company.
4.	
The dispute stems from an Inter-Corporate Deposit (“ICD”) agreement 
dated 09.09.2002, executed between the accused company and the 
Respondent to avail a financial facility of ₹5,00,00,000 (Rupees Five 
Crores) against certain securities for a period of 180 days. Notedly, 
the Appellant(s) were neither in attendance at the board meeting 
held on 09.09.2002, wherein the said transaction was approved, 
nor were they signatories to the agreement or any related financial 
instruments.
5.	
The liability towards repayment of the ICD culminated in the issuance 
of the following post-dated cheques:
	•
Cheque No. 842628 dated 28.02.2005 for ₹50,00,000/-.
	•
Cheque No. 842629 dated 30.03.2005 for ₹50,00,000/-.
Upon presentation, both cheques were dishonored due to insufficient 
funds. Following the dishonor, the Respondent issued legal notices 
demanding payment, but no remedial action was taken by the 
company. Consequently, criminal proceedings were initiated against 
all directors, including the Appellant(s).
6.	
Moreover, the executed ICD agreement contained an arbitration 
clause to be invoked in case of any dispute between the parties. 
The Appellant(s) were unaware of such clause(s) or the terms of the 
4
agreement at the time of execution and only came to know of them 
later. A memorandum of settlement was executed on 27.05.2003 
between the Respondent and the accused company, Accused 
No. 2, Accused No. 6, and Morepen Laboratories Ltd., to resolve 
financial disputes. Pertinently, the Appellant(s) were not a party to 
this settlement.
7.	
The Appellant/K.S. Mehta resigned from the company on 10.11.2012, 
whereas Appellant/Basant Kumar Goswami continued as non-
executive director until 2014. Notwithstanding, the Registrar of 
Companies (“ROC”) records and Corporate Governance Reports 
(“CGR(s)”) submitted to the stock exchange confirmed their 
non-executive status and indicated that they did not draw any 
remuneration apart from a nominal meeting fee. Notedly, neither 
Appellant ever submitted Form 25(C), which is mandatory for 
executive and managing director drawing remuneration, further 
substantiating their lack of involvement in financial affairs of the 
company.
8.	
The following complaints under Section 138 NI Act were filed against 
the Appellant(s) before the Court of Additional Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate, New Delhi:
1.	
Complaint No. 15857 of 2017, filed on 10.11.2005, qua Cheque 
No. 842629.
2.	
Complaint No. 15858 of 2017, filed on 25.10.2005, qua Cheque 
No. 842628.
9.	
The High Court dismissed the Appellant(s)’ petition under Section 
482 CrPC bearing Crl.M.C. No(s). 1643, 1645 and 1345 of 2019 
seeking quashing of the proceedings pending before the Court of 
Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi.
SUBMISSION BY THE PARTIES
10.	 The learned counsel for the Appellant(s) submitted that they had no 
role in the company’s financial transactions and were not vested with 
any responsibility in as much as its financial affairs were concerned. 
Learned counsel contended that the Appellant(s) were not a 
signatory to any of the dishonored cheque(s) and did not authorize 
their issuance. The Appellant(s) directorship was non-executive and 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
5
K.S. Mehta v. M/s Morgan Securities and Credits Pvt. Ltd.
limited to corporate governance oversight in compliance with SEBI 
regulations.
11.	 The learned counsel for the Appellant(s) submitted that their non-
executive status negates any basis for vicarious liability under Section 
141 of the NI Act. The learned counsel further relied upon the CGR(s) 
and ROC record(s), which consistently reflected the Appellant(s) non-
executive roles, reinforcing their lack of involvement in operational or 
financial matters. In the absence of any specific allegations linking 
them to the issuance or dishonor of the cheques, it was contended 
that the proceedings initiated against them were legally untenable.
12.	 The learned counsel for the Appellant relied on judicial precedents 
including Kamalkishor Shrigopal Taparia v. India Ener-Gen Private 
Limited & Anr., 2025 SCC Online SC 321; S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd. v. Neeta Bhalla & Anr., (2005) 8 SCC 89; and Pooja Ravinder 
Devidasani v. State of Maharashtra & Anr. (2014) 16 SCC 1 to 
substantiate that mere designation as a director does not create 
vicarious liability under Section 141 NI Act. There must be specific 
allegations of active participation in the conduct of business at the 
relevant time.
13.	 On the contrary, the learned counsel for the Respondent contended 
that the Appellant(s) name appeared as a director in the company at 
the relevant time, and was presumed to be involved in the company’s 
affairs.
14.	 The learned counsel for the Respondent contended that the mere 
resignation of the Appellant(s) does not automatically absolve a 
director from liability under Section 141 NI Act and that the onus 
lies upon them to establish their non-involvement in the company’s 
financial transactions. The learned counsel placed reliance on 
Ashutosh Ashok Parasrampuriya & Anr. v. Gharrkul Industries 
Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. (2023) 14 SCC 770, to contend that the question of 
the Appellant(s) status as an independent and non-executive director 
is a matter that should be determined during trial rather than at the 
quashing stage.
15.	 The learned counsel for the Respondent also emphasized on the 
Appellant(s) attendance at board meetings, asserting that it indicated 
knowledge of financial dealings, including the issuance of cheques 
towards repayment of the ICD.
6
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
16.	 This Court has consistently held that non-executive and independent 
director(s) cannot be held liable under Section 138 read with Section 
141 of the NI Act unless specific allegations demonstrate their direct 
involvement in affairs of the company at the relevant time. 
16.1.	 This Court in National Small Industries Corpn. Ltd. v. 
Harmeet Singh Paintal & Anr. (2010) 3 SCC 330 observed: 
“13. Section 141 is a penal provision creating 
vicarious liability, and which, as per settled law, must 
be strictly construed. It is therefore, not sufficient to 
make a bald cursory statement in a complaint that 
the Director (arrayed as an accused) is in charge of 
and responsible to the company for the conduct of 
the business of the company without anything more 
as to the role of the Director. But the complaint should 
spell out as to how and in what manner Respondent 
1 was in charge of or was responsible to the accused 
Company for the conduct of its business. This is in 
consonance with strict interpretation of penal statutes, 
especially, where such statutes create vicarious 
liability.
22. Therefore, this Court has distinguished the case 
of persons who are incharge of and responsible for 
the conduct of the business of the company at the 
time of the offence and the persons who are merely 
holding the post in a company and are not in charge 
of and responsible for the conduct of the business of 
the company. Further, in order to fasten the vicarious 
liability in accordance with Section 141, the averment 
as to the role of the Directors concerned should be 
specific. The description should be clear and there 
should be some unambiguous allegations as to how 
the Directors concerned were alleged to be in charge 
of and were responsible for the conduct and affairs 
of the company.
39. From the above discussion, the following 
principles emerge: (i) The primary responsibility is 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
7
K.S. Mehta v. M/s Morgan Securities and Credits Pvt. Ltd.
on the complainant to make specific averments as 
are required under the law in the complaint so as to 
make the accused vicariously liable. For fastening the 
criminal liability, there is no presumption that every 
Director knows about the transaction. (ii) Section 141 
does not make all the Directors liable for the offence. 
The criminal liability can be fastened only on those 
who, at the time of the commission of the offence, 
were in charge of and were responsible for the 
conduct of the business of the company. (iii) Vicarious 
liability can be inferred against a company registered 
or incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 only 
if the requisite statements, which are required to 
be averred in the complaint/petition, are made so 
as to make the accused therein vicariously liable 
for offence committed by the company along with 
averments in the petition containing that the accused 
were in charge of and responsible for the business 
of the company and by virtue of their position they 
are liable to be proceeded with. (iv) Vicarious liability 
on the part of a person must be pleaded and proved 
and not inferred. (v) If the accused is a Managing 
Director or a Joint Managing Director then it is not 
necessary to make specific averment in the complaint 
and by virtue of their position they are liable to be 
proceeded with. (vi) If the accused is a Director or 
an officer of a company who signed the cheques on 
behalf of the company then also it is not necessary 
to make specific averment in the complaint. (vii) The 
person sought to be made liable should be in charge 
of and responsible for the conduct of the business 
of the company at the relevant time. This has to be 
averred as a fact as there is no deemed liability of 
a Director in such cases.” 
16.2.	 In N. K. Wahi v. Shekhar Singh & Ors. (2007) 9 SCC 481 
this Court in Para 8 observed: 
“To launch a prosecution, against the alleged Directors 
there must be a specific allegation in the complaint as 
to the part played by them in the transaction. There 
8
should be clear and unambiguous allegation as to 
how the Directors are in-charge and responsible for 
the conduct of the business of the company. The 
description should be clear. It is true that precise 
words from the provisions of the Act need not be 
reproduced and the court can always come to a 
conclusion in facts of each case. But still, in the 
absence of any averment or specific evidence the 
net result would be that complaint would not be 
entertainable.”
16.3.	 In S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. Neeta Bhalla & Anr. 
(2005) 8 SCC 89, this Court laid down that mere designation 
as a director is not sufficient; specific role and responsibility 
must be established in the complaint.
16.4.	 In Pooja Ravinder Devidasani v. State of Maharashtra & 
Anr. (2014) 16 SCC 1, this Court while taking into consideration 
that a non-executive director plays a governance role, they are 
not involved in the daily operations or financial management of 
the company, held that to attract liability under Section 141 of 
the NI Act, the accused must have been actively in charge of 
the company’s business at the relevant time. Mere directorship 
does not create automatic liability under the Act. The law has 
consistently held that only those who are responsible for the 
day-to-day conduct of business can be held accountable.
16.5.	 In Ashok Shewakramani & Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh 
& Anr. (2023) 8 SCC 473, this Court held:
“8. After having considered the submissions, we are 
of the view that there is non-compliance on the part 
of the second Respondent with the requirements of 
Sub-section (1) of Section 141 of the NI Act. We may 
note here that we are dealing with the Appellants who 
have been alleged to be the Directors of the Accused 
No. 1 company. We are not dealing with the cases 
of a Managing Director or a whole- time Director. 
The Appellants Have not signed the cheques. In the 
facts of these three cases, the cheques have been 
signed by the Managing Director and not by any of 
the Appellants.”
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
9
K.S. Mehta v. M/s Morgan Securities and Credits Pvt. Ltd.
16.6.	 In Hitesh Verma v. M/s Health Care At Home India Pvt. 
Ltd. & Ors., Crl. Appeal No. 462 of 2025, this Court held: 
“4. As the appellant is not a signatory to the cheque, 
he is not liable under Section 138 of the 1881 Act. 
“As it is only the signatory to the cheque who is liable 
under Section 138, unless the case is brought within 
the four corners of Section 141 of the 1881 Act, no 
other person can be held liable….”
5. There are twin requirements under sub-Section (1) 
of Section 141 of the 1881 Act. In the complaint, it 
must be alleged that the person, who is sought to be 
held liable by virtue of vicarious liability, at the time 
when the offence was committed, was in charge of, 
and was responsible to the company for the conduct 
of the business of the company. A Director who is 
in charge of the company and a Director who was 
responsible to the company for the conduct of the 
business, are two different aspects. The requirement 
of law is that both the ingredients of sub-Section (1) 
of Section 141 of the 1881 Act must be incorporated 
in the complaint. Admittedly, there is no assertion 
in the complaints that the appellant, at the time of 
the commission of the offence, was in charge of 
the business of the company. Therefore, on a plain 
reading of the complaints, the appellant cannot be 
prosecuted with the aid of sub-Section (1) of Section 
141 of the 1881 Act.”
17.	 Upon perusal of the record and submissions of the parties, it is 
evident that the Appellant(s) neither issued nor signed the dishonoured 
cheques, nor had any role in their execution. There is no material 
on record to suggest that they were responsible for the issuance of 
the cheques in question. Their involvement in the company’s affairs 
was purely non-executive, confined to governance oversight, and did 
not extend to financial decision-making or operational management.
18.	 The complaint lacks specific averments that establish a direct nexus 
between the Appellant(s) and the financial transactions in question 
or demonstrate their involvement in the company’s financial affairs. 
Additionally, the CGR(s) and ROC records unequivocally confirm their 
10
non-executive status, underscoring their limited role in governance 
without any executive decision-making authority. The mere fact that 
Appellant(s) attended board meetings does not suffice to impose 
financial liability on the Appellant(s), as such attendance does not 
automatically translate into control over financial operations.
CONCLUSION
19.	 Given the lack of specific allegations and in view of the aforesaid 
observations, the Appellant(s) cannot be held vicariously liable under 
Section 141 of the NI Act.
20.	 Accordingly, the Impugned Judgment and Order dated 28.11.2023 of 
the High Court is set aside, and the criminal proceedings against the 
Appellant(s) in Complaint No(s). 15858 and 15857 of 2017 pending 
before the Court of Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, New 
Delhi are hereby quashed. 
21.	 The appeals are allowed. No order as to costs.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Gaurav Upadhyay, Hony. Associate Editor 
(Verified by: Abhinav Mukherjee, Sr. Adv.)