[2025] 5 S.C.R. 842 : 2025 INSC 712
Waris 
v. 
State of Madhya Pradesh
(Criminal Appeal No(s). 429-430 of 2020)
08 May 2025
[Vikram Nath, Sanjay Karol and Sandeep Mehta,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether Trial Court ought to have given proper time and opportunity 
to the legal aid defence counsel to prepare the matter and should 
have deferred the cross-examination of PW-1 by a reasonable time 
so as to ensure fairness in the proceedings.
Headnotes†
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 – ss.408, 432  – 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – ss.367, 391 – Penal 
Code, 1860 – ss.302, 201, 376(2)(i), 376AB – Protection of 
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 – ss.5, 6 – Accused-
appellant charged for subjecting his step-daughter to sexual 
assault and throttling her to death – On date of examination 
of PW-1, advocate of accused-appellant was not present – 
Accused-appellant pleaded he could not afford the fees 
and was unable to engage counsel – On prayer of accused-
appellant, Trial Court appointed legal aid defence counsel to 
represent accused-appellant – On the very same day, trial 
court proceeded to record the evidence of PW-1 and ensured 
that cross-examination of witness is completed by the legal 
aid counsel – Subsequently, accused-appellant was convicted 
and awarded death sentence – The High Court confirmed the 
death sentence – Correctness:
Held: The documents available on the record indicate that the 
accused-appellant was shown to be educated till 4th standard 
only – Thus, there is no dispute on the aspect that the accused-
appellant was a semi-literate, rustic villager – The fact that the 
accused-appellant hails from a very poor background is also 
borne out from the record inasmuch as, he could not even afford 
the fees of the lawyer he had engaged to defend him, in a case 
which had the potential of capital punishment right from the 
* Author
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
843
Waris v. State of Madhya Pradesh
inception – Denial of a competent experienced defence counsel to 
an accused tantamounts to deprivation of fair trial – Providing an 
experienced legal aid defence counsel to an unrepresented accused 
in criminal proceedings is within the scope of the Fundamental 
Right guaranteed by Art. 22(1) of the Constitution of India – In 
the instant case, the order sheet of the trial Court does not even 
indicate whether the legal aid defence counsel was provided with 
the copies of the documents relied upon by the prosecution by 
following the mandate of s.207 CrPC – The trial Court ought to 
have given proper time and opportunity to the legal aid defence 
counsel to prepare the matter – Providing such an opportunity to 
the accused-appellant was absolutely essential and imperative for 
a just decision of the case – This Court hereby exercise powers 
u/s.408 BNSS (corresponding, s.367 CrPC) r/w. s.432 of BNSS 
(corresponding, s.391 CrPC) and remit the matter back to the 
trial Court, i.e., Second ASJ and Special Judge (POCSO Act), for 
further examination of the star prosecution witness, i.e., (PW-1) – 
The trial Court to ensure that the complete record is provided to 
the legal aid defence counsel well in advance. [Paras 14, 15, 17, 
19, 20, 21, 23, 25, 27]
Legal Aid Authorities – National Legal Service Authority – Legal 
Aid Defense Counsel – Core Principles – Discussed. [Para 16]
Witness – Witness Protection Scheme – Appropriate protection 
to witness – Directions issued. [Paras 26-29]
Case Law Cited
Mohd. Hussain @ Zulfikar Ali v. State (Government of NCT of 
Delhi) [2012] 1 SCR 64 : (2012) 2 SCC 584; Anokhilal v. State of 
Madhya Pradesh [2019] 18 SCR 1196 : (2019) 20 SCC 196; Ashok 
v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2025) 2 SCC 381; Atma Ram v. State of 
Rajasthan [2019] 5 SCR 714 : (2019) 20 SCC 481 – referred to.
List of Acts
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973; Penal Code, 1860; Protection of Children from 
Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
List of Keywords
Legal Aid Defense Counsel; Semi-literate; Rustic villager; Capital 
punishment; Denial of competent experienced defence counsel; 
844
Supreme Court Reports
Deprivation of fair trial; De novo trial; Fundamental Right; 
Reasonable opportunity to prepare and conduct the case; Mistrial; 
Remit; Witness protection scheme.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No(s). 
429-430 of 2020
From the Judgment and Order dated 18.11.2019 of the High Court of 
M.P. at Indore in CRRFC No. 1 of 2019 and CRA No. 1854 of 2019
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Chander Uday Singh, Sr. Adv., Ms. Sakshi Jain, Ms. Viddusshi 
Shandilya, Ms. Bidya Mohanty, Ms. Katyayani Suhrud, Abhishek 
Kalaiyarasan, Kaustubh Anshuraj.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Bhupendra Pratap Singh, D.A.G., Abhimanyu Singh (ga), 
Pashupathi Nath Razdan, Mirza Kayesh Begg, Ms. Maitreyee 
Jagat Joshi, Astik Gupta, Ms. Akanksha Tomar.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
Mehta, J.
1.	
Heard.
2.	
The appellant herein1 was arraigned as an accused in connection with 
FIR bearing Crime No. 98 of 2018 dated 24th April, 2018 registered 
at Police Station Piploda, District Ratlam for the offences punishable 
under Sections 302, 201, 376(2)(i), and 376AB of the Indian Penal 
Code, 18602 and Sections 5/6 of the Protection of Children from Sexual 
Offences Act, 20123. The charge against the accused-appellant was 
of subjecting his own step-daughter being Musst. ‘A’ to sexual assault 
1	
Hereinafter, referred to as “accused-appellant”.
2	
Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘IPC’.
3	
Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘POCSO Act’.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
845
Waris v. State of Madhya Pradesh
and then throttling her to death. The prime witness of the incident 
was none other than the mother of the child victim and wife of the 
accused-appellant, namely, Smt. Salma Bi (PW-1). A charge sheet 
was filed against the accused-appellant for the aforesaid offences in 
the Court of Second ASJ and Special Judge (POCSO Act), Jaora, 
District Ratlam, Madhya Pradesh4 where Special Case No. 3 of 2018 
came to be registered on 18th June, 2018.
3.	
The matter was posted by the trial Court for consideration of 
arguments on charge on 21st June, 2018, on which date, advocate 
engaged by the accused-appellant appeared and refused to plead 
on his behalf. On this, the accused-appellant requested that he may 
be given some time to address the argument on charge because 
he would be engaging another counsel to represent him in the trial. 
The matter was thereupon, deferred to 2nd July, 2018. On that date, 
Advocate Mr. Mohd. Ahmad Khan put in appearance on behalf of 
the accused-appellant and was permitted to file his vakalatnama. On 
the same day, the trial Court framed charges against the accused-
appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 376(2)(f), 
376(2)(i), 376(2)(n), 376AB, 302 and 201 of the IPC and Sections 
5/6 of the POCSO Act. The accused-appellant abjured his guilt and 
claimed trial. The trial Court posted the matter on 6th July, 2018 for 
fixing the calendar of trial.
4.	
On 6th July, 2018, Advocate Mr. Mohd. Ahmad Khan appeared on 
behalf of the accused-appellant. The prosecution suggested two dates 
for examining its witnesses. On the first date, i.e., 16th July, 2018, 
the star prosecution witness i.e., Smt. Salma Bi (PW-1) was to be 
summoned whereas, two more witnesses were to be summoned 
on 17th July, 2018.
5.	
On 16th July, 2018, the accused-appellant was presented before 
the trial Court from jail. The counsel engaged by him i.e., Advocate 
Mr. Mohd. Ahmad Khan was not present. The accused-appellant 
pleaded that he could not afford the fees of his counsel and thus, 
was unable to engage a counsel on his own. He prayed to the trial 
Court for being provided the services of a legal aid defence counsel. 
The trial Court accepted the said prayer of the accused-appellant 
and appointed Advocate Mr. Ajay Srivastava as a legal aid defence 
4	
Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘trial Court’.
846
Supreme Court Reports
counsel to represent the accused-appellant. On the very same 
day, the trial Judge proceeded to record the evidence of the star 
prosecution witness, i.e., Salma Bi (PW-1) and also ensured that 
the legal aid defence counsel completed the cross-examination from 
the said witness.
6.	
The trial Court upon conclusion of the trial convicted the accused-
appellant, vide judgment dated 17th December, 2018 for the offences 
punishable under Sections 376(2)(f), 376(2)(n), 376AB, 302 and 201 
of the IPC and Sections 5/6 of the POCSO Act and sentenced him 
in the terms indicated below: -
Sections
Sentence Awarded
376AB IPC
Death sentence along with fine of 
Rs. 5,000/- and in default to undergo 
1-year rigorous imprisonment.
302 IPC
Death sentence along with fine of 
Rs. 5,000/- and in default to undergo 
1-year rigorous imprisonment.
201 IPC
Rigorous imprisonment of 5 years 
along with fine of Rs. 5,000/-.
7.	
The accused-appellant preferred an appeal5 assailing his conviction 
and the trial Court forwarded a reference6 under Section 366 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 19737 to the High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh at Indore8 for confirmation of the death sentence.
8.	
Before the High Court, a specific plea was taken on behalf of the 
accused-appellant that he was not provided proper opportunity of 
defence inasmuch as the legal aid defence counsel appointed on 
his behalf was totally inexperienced. Thus, evidently, the accused-
appellant had raised an objection regarding the competence and 
capability of the legal aid defence counsel. However, the High 
Court did not give much credence to the said pertinent objection 
raised on behalf of the accused-appellant and vide judgment dated 
5	
Criminal Appeal No. 1854 of 2019.
6	
Criminal Reference No. 1 of 2019.
7	
For short “CrPC”.
8	
Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘High Court’.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
847
Waris v. State of Madhya Pradesh
18th November, 2019 proceeded to dismiss his appeal while answering 
the reference in affirmative thereby, confirming the penalty of death 
sentence awarded to the accused-appellant by the trial Court.
9.	
Being aggrieved, the accused-appellant has preferred the instant 
appeal by special leave before this Court.
10.	 Learned senior counsel Mr. Chander Uday Singh appearing on behalf 
of the accused-appellant at the very outset, vehemently and fervently 
urged that the accused-appellant has been seriously prejudiced on 
account of the fact that the legal aid defence counsel appointed 
by the trial Court to conduct the proceedings on his behalf was an 
inexperienced hand and in addition thereto, the said counsel was not 
given even the bare minimum time required to prepare the brief and 
conduct the cross-examination from the witnesses. The free legal 
aid counsel was appointed on 16th July, 2018 because the accused-
appellant expressed his inability to pay the fees of the counsel 
engaged by him. On the very same day, the trial Court appointed a 
legal aid defence counsel and compelled him to conduct the cross-
examination from the star prosecution witness, i.e., Smt. Salma Bi 
(PW-1), on whose testimony the entire fulcrum of the prosecution 
case is based.
11.	 He contended that the accused-appellant deserves an opportunity 
to fair trial by setting aside the impugned judgments and remanding 
the matter to the trial Court for de novo proceedings.
12.	 Per contra, learned counsel representing the respondent-State 
has opposed the submissions advanced by learned senior counsel 
appearing on behalf of the accused-appellant. He urged that the 
accused-appellant never raised the issue of denial of fair opportunity 
or prejudice either before the trial Court or the High Court. This 
contention is being raised for the first time before this Court. He urged 
that if at all, the accused-appellant felt that he had been deprived of 
an opportunity to effectively cross-examine the prosecution witnesses, 
he could have moved an application under Section 311 CrPC before 
the trial Court itself for recalling the concerned witnesses. This highly 
belated plea of lack of opportunity to fair trial is nothing but a ploy 
to sabotage the case of the prosecution, and to make an effort to 
win over the witnesses by asking for a de novo trial.
848
Supreme Court Reports
13.	 We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions 
advanced at bar and have gone through the material available on 
record.
14.	 The documents available on the record indicate that the accused-
appellant was shown to be educated till 4th standard only. Thus, 
there is no dispute on the aspect that the accused-appellant was 
a semi-literate, rustic villager. The fact that the accused-appellant 
hails from a very poor background is also borne out from the record 
inasmuch as, he could not even afford the fees of the lawyer he had 
engaged to defend him, in a case which had the potential of capital 
punishment right from the inception.
15.	 This Court has observed time and again that denial of a competent 
experienced defence counsel to an accused tantamounts to 
deprivation of fair trial. This apprehension would be magnified 
where the accused-appellant is charged for offences punishable 
with life imprisonment/death penalty. There is a plethora of similar 
cases where this Court has been compelled to acquit the accused 
or remand the proceedings to the trial Court for conducting de novo 
trial after providing an experienced free legal aid defence counsel to 
the accused. We may gainfully refer to Mohd. Hussain @ Zulfikar 
Ali v. State (Government of NCT of Delhi)9; Anokhilal v. State of 
Madhya Pradesh10 and Ashok v. State of Uttar Pradesh11.
16.	 At this stage, it must be observed that significant strides have 
been made by legal aid authorities in India for creation of a robust 
mechanism so as to provide effective and efficient legal aid services 
to the poor and needy in the criminal justice system. The National 
Legal Services Authority (NALSA) has been at the forefront of these 
efforts and has played a major role in expanding legal aid services 
to people in need throughout the country. This has been further 
supplemented by the introduction of the Legal Aid Defense Counsel 
Scheme, 2022, which embodies the following core principles: -
	•
Increase in Availability and accessibility of Legal Aid Defense 
counsels;
9	
(2012) 2 SCC 584.
10	
(2019) 20 SCC 196.
11	
(2025) 2 SCC 381.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
849
Waris v. State of Madhya Pradesh
	•
Effective and efficient representation by experienced lawyers;
	•
Timely and lively Client Consultations;
	•
Effective monitoring and mentoring of legal aided cases;
	•
Professional management of legal aid work in criminal matters;
	•
Enhanced responsiveness leading to updating legal aid seekers 
about the progress of their cases;
	•
Ensuring accountability on the part of the legal aid providers.
The realization of the aforesaid principles will go a long way in 
providing qualitative and competent legal services in criminal matters 
to all eligible persons. This will further help with the management 
and implementation of the legal aid system in a more professional 
manner, especially in criminal matters.
17.	 Providing an experienced legal aid defence counsel to an 
unrepresented accused in criminal proceedings is within the scope of 
the Fundamental Right guaranteed by Article 22(1) of the Constitution 
of India and gets along with the aims and objectives of the Legal 
Aid Defence Counsel Scheme floated by NALSA.
18.	 It cannot be gainsaid that once a legal aid defence counsel is provided 
to the accused, more particularly, in a case involving offences where 
capital punishment is provided as a sentence, the trial Court must 
ensure that the counsel so appointed gets a reasonable opportunity 
to prepare and conduct the case on behalf of the accused. Failure 
to do so would vitiate the proceedings as being a case of a mistrial. 
This is what has precisely happened in this case.
19.	 It is clearly borne out from the record that initially the lawyer engaged 
on behalf of the accused-appellant refused to plead the case on his 
behalf. The second lawyer appointed by the accused-appellant did 
not appear before the trial Court on 16th July, 2018 when the star 
prosecution witness i.e., Smt. Salma Bi (PW-1) had been summoned 
to testify at the trial. The trial Court accepted the request of the 
accused-appellant and appointed Advocate Shri Ajay Srivastava as 
a free legal aid defence counsel to conduct the trial on behalf of the 
accused-appellant. The order sheets of the trial Court clearly indicate 
that the legal aid counsel was appointed on 16th July, 2018 and on 
the very same day, the trial Court proceeded to record the complete 
850
Supreme Court Reports
deposition of Smt. Salma Bi (PW-1), including the cross-examination 
from the said witness. The order sheet of the trial Court does not 
even indicate whether the legal aid defence counsel was provided 
with the copies of the documents relied upon by the prosecution by 
following the mandate of Section 207 CrPC, which is equivalent to 
Section 230 of Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 202312.
20.	 We have perused the cross-examination conducted by the legal aid 
defence counsel from the star prosecution witness, i.e., Smt. Salma 
Bi (PW-1) and find that there are certain vital aspects of the case on 
which hardly any question was put to the said witness. Thus, grave 
prejudice caused by undue haste is writ large on the face of record 
by the manner in which the trial Court proceeded to provide the 
services of the free legal aid counsel to the accused-appellant and 
thereafter proceeded to record the testimony of the star prosecution 
witness, i.e., Smt. Salma Bi (PW-1).
21.	 We hasten to add that apart from the said deviation, the trial 
Court conducted the proceedings with remarkable precision and 
thoroughness warranted in a case of this nature and completed 
the trial of the case within 6 months from the date of filing of the 
chargesheet. However, the aforesaid deviation by the trial Court 
(supra) which may have been unintentional and inadvertent has led 
to grave prejudice being caused to the defence thereby compelling 
us to exercise powers under Section 408 BNSS (corresponding, 
Section 367 CrPC) read with Section 432 of BNSS (corresponding, 
Section 391 CrPC). For ready reference, the aforesaid provisions 
are quoted herein below: -
“408. Power to direct further inquiry to be made or 
additional evidence to be taken. — 
(1) If, when such proceedings are submitted, the High 
Court thinks that a further inquiry should be made into, or 
additional evidence taken upon, any point bearing upon the 
guilt or innocence of the convicted person, it may make 
such inquiry or take such evidence itself, or direct it to be 
made or taken by the Court of Session.
12	
For short “BNSS”.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
851
Waris v. State of Madhya Pradesh
(2) Unless the High Court otherwise directs, the presence 
of the convicted person may be dispensed with when such 
inquiry is made or such evidence is taken. 
(3) When the inquiry or evidence (if any) is not made 
or taken by the High Court, the result of such inquiry or 
evidence shall be certified to such Court.
432. Appellate Court may take further evidence or 
direct it to be taken. — 
(1) In dealing with any appeal under this Chapter, the 
Appellate Court, if it thinks additional evidence to be 
necessary, shall record its reasons and may either take 
such evidence itself, or direct it to be taken by a Magistrate 
or, when the Appellate Court is a High Court, by a Court 
of Session or a Magistrate. 
(2) When the additional evidence is taken by the Court 
of Session or the Magistrate, it or he shall certify such 
evidence to the Appellate Court, and such Court shall 
thereupon proceed to dispose of the appeal. 
(3) The accused or his pleader shall have the right to be 
present when the additional evidence is taken. 
(4) The taking of evidence under this section shall be 
subject to the provisions of Chapter XXIII, as if it were 
an inquiry.”
22.	 In this regard, we may gainfully refer to the judgment of this Court 
in Atma Ram v. State of Rajasthan13, wherein it was held: -
“22. According to Section 366 when a Court of Session passes 
a sentence of death, the proceedings must be submitted to the 
High Court and the sentence of death is not to be executed 
unless it is confirmed by the High Court. Section 367 then 
proceeds to lay down the power of the High Court to 
direct further enquiry to be made or additional evidence 
to be taken. Section 368, thereafter, lays down the power of 
the High Court to confirm the sentence so imposed or annul 
13	
(2019) 20 SCC 481.
852
Supreme Court Reports
the conviction. One of the powers which the High Court can 
exercise is one under Section 368(c) of the Code and that is 
to “acquit the accused person”. Pertinently, the power to acquit 
the person can be exercised by the High Court even without 
there being any substantive appeal on the part of the accused 
challenging his conviction. To that extent, the proceedings 
under Chapter XXVIII which deal with “submission of death 
sentences for confirmation” is a proceeding in continuation of 
the trial. These provisions thus entitle the High Court to direct 
further enquiry or to take additional evidence and the High 
Court may, in a given case, even acquit the accused person. 
The scope of the chapter is wider. Chapter XXIX of the 
Code deals with “Appeals”. Section 391 also entitles the 
appellate court to take further evidence or direct such 
further evidence to be taken. Section 386 then enumerates 
powers of the appellate court which inter alia includes the 
power to “reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or 
discharge the accused or order him to be re-tried by a court 
of competent jurisdiction subordinate to such appellate 
court or committed for trial”. The powers of the appellate 
court are equally wide. The High Court in the present case 
was exercising powers both under Chapters XXVIII and XXIX 
of the Code. If the power can go to the extent of ordering 
a complete retrial, the exercise of power to a lesser extent, 
namely, ordering de novo examination of twelve witnesses 
with further directions as the High Court has imposed in 
the present matter, was certainly within the powers of the 
High Court. There is, thus, no infraction or jurisdictional 
error on the part of the High Court.
23. It is true that as consistently laid down by this Court, 
an order of retrial of a criminal case is not to be taken 
resort to easily and must be made in exceptional cases. For 
example, it was observed by this Court in Ukha Kolhe v. State 
of Maharashtra [Ukha Kolhe v. State of Maharashtra, (1964) 1 
SCR 926 : AIR 1963 SC 1531 : (1963) 2 Cri LJ 418] , as under: 
(AIR p. 1537, para 11)
“11. An order for retrial of a criminal case is made in 
exceptional cases, and not unless the appellate court 
is satisfied that the court trying the proceeding had 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
853
Waris v. State of Madhya Pradesh
no jurisdiction to try it or that the trial was vitiated 
by serious illegalities or irregularities or on account 
of misconception of the nature of the proceedings 
and on that account in substance there had been no 
real trial or that the prosecutor or an accused was, 
for reasons over which he had no control, prevented 
from leading or tendering evidence material to the 
charge, and in the interests of justice the appellate 
court deems it appropriate, having regard to the 
circumstances of the case, that the accused should 
be put on his trial again. An order of retrial wipes 
out from the record the earlier proceeding, and 
exposes the person accused to another trial which 
affords the prosecutor an opportunity to rectify the 
infirmities disclosed in the earlier trial, and will not 
ordinarily be countenanced when it is made merely 
to enable the prosecutor to lead evidence which he 
could but has not cared to lead either on account 
of insufficient appreciation of the nature of the case 
or for other reasons. Harries, C.J., in Ramanlal 
Rathi v. State [Ramanlal Rathi v. State, 1950 SCC 
OnLine Cal 62 : AIR 1951 Cal 305] : (SCC OnLine 
Cal para 10)
‘10. If at the end of a criminal prosecution 
the evidence leaves the Court in doubt 
as to the guilt of the accused the latter is 
entitled to a verdict of not guilty. A retrial 
may be ordered when the original trial 
has not been satisfactory for particular 
reasons, for example, if evidence had been 
wrongly rejected which should have been 
admitted, or admitted when it should have 
been rejected, or the Court had refused to 
hear certain witnesses who should, have 
been heard. But, I have never known of 
a case where a retrial can be ordered on 
the ground that the prosecution did not 
produce the proper evidence and did not 
know how to prove their case.’ ”
854
Supreme Court Reports
24.	 The order passed by the High Court in the present 
matter was not to enable the prosecutor to rectify 
the defects or infirmities in the evidence or to enable 
him to lead evidence which he had not cared to lead 
on the earlier occasion. The evidence in the form of 
testimony of those twelve witnesses was led and 
those witnesses were cross-examined. There was no 
infirmity except the one that the evidence was not led 
in the presence of the appellants. The remedy proposed 
was only to rectify such infirmity, and not to enable the 
prosecutor to rectify defects in the evidence.”
(emphasis supplied)
23.	 In the circumstances indicated above, we are unequivocal on the 
aspect that the trial Court ought to have given proper time and 
opportunity to the legal aid defence counsel to prepare the matter 
and should have deferred the cross-examination of Smt. Salma Bi 
(PW-1) by a reasonable time so as to ensure fairness in the 
proceedings both for the prosecution and the defence and thereby, 
dispelling the sense of prejudice to the accused-appellant.
24.	 We further feel that providing such an opportunity to the accused-
appellant was absolutely essential and imperative for a just decision 
of the case.
25.	 In wake of the decision made hereinabove, we hereby exercise 
powers under Section 408 BNSS (corresponding, Section 367 
CrPC) read with Section 432 of BNSS (corresponding, Section 391 
CrPC) and remit the matter back to the trial Court, i.e., Second ASJ 
and Special Judge (POCSO Act), Jaora, District Ratlam, Madhya 
Pradesh for further examination of the star prosecution witness, i.e., 
Smt. Salma Bi (PW-1).
26.	 The witness Smt. Salma Bi (PW-1) shall be summoned in the Court 
and the accused-appellant shall be provided appropriate opportunity 
to conduct cross-examination from the said witness. There has been a 
significant time gap between the incident and the direction to recall the 
witness. Thus, there would be an imminent possibility of the defence 
trying to win over the witness or the witness experiencing diminished 
memory owing to the long-time gap. We, therefore, direct that the 
trial Court and the District Superintendent of Police shall ensure that 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
855
Waris v. State of Madhya Pradesh
appropriate protection is provided to the witness as warranted under 
the ‘witness protection scheme’. The witness may be provided proper 
counselling by a Senior/Special Public Prosecutor before stepping 
into the witness box for deposition. If desired, an experienced legal 
aid defence counsel shall be appointed to represent the accused-
appellant for conducting cross-examination from the witness.
27.	 If required, the trial Court shall ensure that the complete record is 
provided to the legal aid defence counsel well in advance and at least 
15 days before the date on which the witness is to be summoned for 
further examination. The prosecution, if so required, shall be given 
a reasonable opportunity to put additional questions to the witness 
by way of re-examination.
28.	 It is made clear that the accused-appellant would be at liberty to 
engage his own counsel or he may also get the cross-examination 
conducted by the counsel assisting him under Project 39A. If the 
original trial Court record has been summoned, the Registry of this 
Court shall remit the same back to the trial Court forthwith.
29.	 The accused-appellant shall be permitted to remain present in the 
proceedings virtually from jail by strictly adhering to the procedure 
provided for trials under the POCSO Act. The trial Court shall 
summon Smt. Salma Bi (PW-1) for further examination in the terms 
indicated above on 11th June, 2025. The original record along with the 
additional statement of Smt. Salma Bi (PW-1) recorded in compliance 
of this order shall be forwarded to this Court forthwith once such 
proceedings are completed.
30.	 List on 17th July, 2025 for hearing.
Result of the case: Matter listed for hearing.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan