[2025] 5 S.C.R. 33 : 2025 INSC 453
Sohom Shipping Pvt. Ltd.  
v. 
M/s The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. & Anr.
(Civil Appeal No. 2323 of 2021)
07 April 2025
[B.V. Nagarathna and Satish Chandra Sharma,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The present dispute hinges on the phrase “voyage should 
commence & complete before monsoon sets in”, a special condition 
contained in the contract for insurance between the parties, and 
raises questions regarding its validity, interpretation and materiality. 
Whether, the special condition in the policy schedule for voyage 
insurance stands breached justifying the de facto repudiation of 
the appellant’s claim by the respondent.
Headnotes†
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 – s.67 – Insurance Contract – 
The appellant company insured its voyage and the vessel 
with the respondent insurance company – The insurance 
contract contained a special condition that the “voyage 
should commence & complete before the monsoon sets 
in” – The vessel undertook voyage on 06.06.2013 and on the 
very next day it got anchored due to bad weather and engine 
failure – The insurance claim of the appellant was repudiated 
on the ground that the vessel set sail after monsoon set in 
thereby breaching the special condition in the insurance 
contract – NCDRC dismissed the complaint of the appellant 
on account of the doctrine of Uberrima fidei (good faith) 
being compromised – Correctness:
Held: There is no doubt that the policy was taken for a period 
of one month (16.05.2013 to 15.06.2013) to cover the voyage 
from Mumbai to Kolkata – Further, as per the DGS Circular, 
foul weather commences on 1st May itself on the East Coast – 
The respondent’s contention that they had no knowledge of the 
voyage and that they believed that the Vessel would be laid up 
at the Kolkata harbour during the foul season is unacceptable 
* Author
34
Supreme Court Reports
and is to be rejected – The appellant had mentioned in the form 
that the purpose of insurance is to undertake the voyage from 
Ghodbunder Jetty in Mumbai to Kolkata harbour – The only logical 
conclusion of the information provided is that the insurance was 
availed to cover the foul weather period along the west and east 
coast – Even if the voyage was undertaken immediately, i.e. on 
16.05.2013, the Vessel would have arrived at the Kolkata harbour 
in the first week of June 2013, i.e. after the commencement of 
foul weather season on the east coast – There is absolutely no 
permutation and combination in which the appellant could have 
fulfilled this condition under the policy, given its voyage from 
Mumbai (west coast) to Kolkata (east coast) via several coastal 
States – Further, the special condition necessitates that the voyage 
commences and is completed before monsoon sets in – If the 
condition is to be interpreted strictly, then the assured would be 
unable to make a claim in case of a marine accident where the 
vessel is unable to complete its voyage due to a peril, rendering 
the special condition impossible to comply with – Ultimately, the 
assured would be without any remedy under the insurance – This 
amounts to an absurdity, vitiating the very purpose behind an 
insurance contract – As a result, the special condition cannot be 
treated as a condition precedent to waive any liability under the 
policy – It has been impliedly waived by the parties due to its 
non-material nature – In the instant case, the respondent is not 
entitled to repudiate the claim of the appellant on the ground of 
breach of the special condition – The matter is remanded to the 
NCDRC with a direction to determine the extent of the insured sum 
liable to be paid by the respondent to the appellant. [Paras 18, 21]
Insurance – Interpretation of Insurance contract – Uberrima 
Fides:
Held: It is trite to state that the interpretation of the Insurance 
Contract falls upon the same principles as the interpretation of 
any contract, except that there exists a requirement of uberrima 
fides, i.e. good faith on part of the assured – It is therefore 
well-settled that the policy and all the terms therein ought to be 
construed strictly, to the extent possible. [Para 11]
Rule of Construction – Contra proferentem – Discussed. 
[Para 15]
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
35
Sohom Shipping Pvt. Ltd. v.  
M/s The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. & Anr.
Case Law Cited
General Assurance Society Ltd. v. Chandumull Jain & Anr. [1966] 
3 SCR 500; Industrial Promotion and Investment Corporation of 
Orissa Ltd. v. New India Assurance Company Ltd. & Anr. (2016) 
15 SCC 315 – relied on.
Dawsons Ltd. v. Bonnin [1992] 2 A.C. 413; Ramji Karamsi v. 
The Unique Motor and General Insurance Co. Ltd., AIR 1951 
Bom 347; Sea Lark Fisheries v. United India Insurance Co. & 
Anr. [2008] 2 SCR 346 : (2008) 4 SCC 131; Deokar Exports (P) 
Ltd. v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd. [2008] 14 SCR 1 : (2008) 
14 SCC 598; Contship Container Lines Ltd. v. D.K. Lall & Ors. 
[2010] 3 SCR 460 : (2010) 4 SCC 256; Rajankumar & Brothers 
(Impex) v. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. [2020] 6 SCR 163: (2020) 
4 SCC 364; Hind Offshore (P) Ltd. v. IffcoTokio General Insurance 
Co. Ltd. [2023] 12 SCR 959 : (2023) 9 SCC 407 – referred to.
List of Acts
Consumer Protection Act, 2019.
List of Keywords
Doctrine of Uberrima Fidei; Contra proferentum; Insurance contract; 
Voyage should commence & complete before monsoon sets in; 
Special condition in insurance contract; Policy Schedule for Voyage 
Insurance; Foul weather.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2323 of 2021
From the Judgment and Order dated 13.04.2021 of the National 
Consumers Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi in CC No. 
101 of 2015
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Huzefa Ahmadi, Siddharth Bhatnagar, Sr. Advs., Amol Chitale,  
Ms. Sonia Dube, Ms. Kanchan Yadav, Tanishq Sharma, Ms. Saumya 
Sharma, Ashray Chopra, M/S. Legal Options.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Devadutt Kamat, Sr. Adv., Nikhil Jain, Abhishek Gola, Anshul Mehral, 
Ms. Sayatani, Ms. Divya Jain
36
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Satish Chandra Sharma, J. 
1.	
The present dispute hinges on the phrase “voyage should commence 
& complete before monsoon sets in” contained in the contract for 
insurance between the parties, and raises questions regarding its 
validity, interpretation and materiality.
2.	
The appeal before us has been preferred by the Appellant under 
Section 67 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (hereinafter “COPRA”) 
against the final judgement and order dated 13.04.2021 (hereinafter 
“Impugned Order”) passed by the National Consumer Disputes 
Redressal Commission, New Delhi (hereinafter “NCDRC”) dismissing 
the consumer complaint filed by the Appellant herein on account of 
the doctrine of Uberrima Fidei being compromised.
3.	
Factual Background
3.1	 The Appellant is engaged in the shipping business and has 
its offices at Sougor Road Kulpi, Diamond Harbour, Haldia 
and Kolkata. The Appellant purchased a newly built barge 
‘Srijoy II’ (hereinafter “the Vessel”) and sought to undertake 
its maiden voyage from Mumbai to Kolkata. 
3.2	 In pursuance of the same, the Appellant applied for a 
‘single voyage permit’ to the Director General of Shipping 
(hereinafter “DGS”), wherein the Vessel was expected to 
sail from Mumbai on 30.04.2013 and arrive at Kolkata 
on 15.05.2013. The DGS directed the Indian Register of 
Shipping (hereinafter “IRS”) to carry out a detailed inspection.
3.3	 The Appellant sought to insure its voyage and the Vessel, 
and submitted its insurance proposal to the Respondent. 
Thereafter, an insurance contract was entered into between 
the parties for the period between 16.05.2013 to 15.06.2013 
(hereinafter “the Insurance Contract”). The Insurance 
Contract contained a special condition that the “voyage 
should commence & complete before monsoon sets in”. 
Further, it contained Special Warranties, inter alia that the 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
37
Sohom Shipping Pvt. Ltd. v.  
M/s The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. & Anr.
“Vessel to depart in local weather condition not exceeding 
Beaufort Scale No. 4…”. 
3.4	 The IRS granted clearance to the Appellant to undertake 
its voyage in accordance with MS Circular No. 03 of 2008. 
Thereafter, the DGS issued a “No objection” with respect 
to the same. 
3.5	 The Vessel undertook the voyage on 06.06.2013. 
Unfortunately, on the very next day it was anchored off 
near Ratnagiri Port due to bad weather and engine failure. 
Ultimately, the Vessel ran aground. 
3.6	 The Appellant sought assistance from the Respondent 
for towing and salvaging the Vessel after the Insurance 
Contract had expired. On 25.07.2013, the Appellant issued 
a ‘Notice of Abandonment’ to the Respondent claiming total 
loss on the ground that repair of the Vessel would be more 
expensive than the amount insured for. 
3.7	 On 12.09.2013, the Respondent issued a ‘Repudiation 
Notice’ rejecting the claim of the Appellant on the ground 
that the Vessel set sail after ‘monsoon set in’ breaching the 
special condition in the Insurance Contract. Subsequently, 
the surveyor appointed by the Respondent issued its final 
report concluding that the Appellant was in wilful breach 
of the condition. 
3.8	 Aggrieved by the repudiation of the insurance claim, the 
Appellant herein filed a consumer complaint under Section 
21 of COPRA before the NCDRC. Vide Impugned Order 
dated 13.04.2021, the NCDRC dismissed the complaint on 
the ground that the Appellant suppressed material facts by 
not disclosing all its plans to the Respondent, and did not 
conduct itself in good faith. 
4.	
Submissions by the Appellant
4.1	 Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi, learned Sr. Counsel for the Appellant 
has strongly urged before us that the conclusion drawn 
by the NCDRC is contrary to law and prays for the same 
to be set aside. 
38
Supreme Court Reports
4.2	 The primary contention of the Appellant is that the 
Respondent knew or should have known that the policy 
period covers the foul period, and therefore the policy 
cannot stand repudiated on this ground.
4.3	 That the special condition contained in the insurance 
contract was non-material as the Respondent was aware 
that the voyage was to be undertaken in foul weather. 
Further, in the event that the special condition is to be 
taken into account, there has been an implied waiver 
of the same at the time of entering into the contract as 
the period of 1 month for which the insurance cover was 
availed of, covers the foul weather period as well, and 
the Respondent was aware that the Vessel would be 
travelling from Mumbai to Kolkata through Kerala, where 
the monsoon sets in on June 1st. 
4.4	 That the Court must apply the common law rule of verba 
chartarum fortius accipiuntur contra proferentem or simply 
put ‘Contra Proferentum’ against the Respondent as the 
phrase is ambiguous on account of extrinsic evidence of 
surrounding circumstances (Reliance placed on General 
Assurance Society Ltd. v. Chandumull Jain & Anr. 
(1966) 3 SCR 500; Industrial Promotion and Investment 
Corporation of Orissa Ltd. v. New India Assurance 
Company Ltd. & Anr. (2016) 15 SCC 315; Dawsons Ltd. 
v. Bonnin [1992] 2 A.C. 413.
4.5	 The Appellant has also submitted that the Respondent failed 
its duty to conduct reasonable due diligence as it provided 
the policy knowing the circumstances.
4.6	 That if the special condition is treated as a condition 
precedent, it would result in absurd consequences as any 
claim made would fall foul of the special condition (Reliance 
placed on Ramji Karamsi v. The Unique Motor and 
General Insurance Co. Ltd. AIR 1951 Bom 347.
5.	
Submissions by the Respondent
5.1.	 Mr. Devadatt Kamat, learned Sr. Counsel for the Respondent 
has placed strong reliance on the Impugned Order as a 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
39
Sohom Shipping Pvt. Ltd. v.  
M/s The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. & Anr.
well-reasoned, valid and legal order which ought not to be 
interfered with. 
5.2.	 That the Appellant has breached the special condition by 
setting sail after monsoon had set in. Clause 3.1.2 of the 
Insurance Contract was also breached by the Appellant 
inasmuch as it breached the conditions imposed by the 
IRS, by sailing in waters where the height of the wave is 
more than 2 metres. 
5.3.	 The counsel for the Respondent submits that the special 
condition is determinable and precise, which dispels 
all arguments regarding its ambiguity and in-turn the 
applicability of the rule of Contra Proferentum. 
5.4.	 That the Appellant has committed forgery and fabricated the 
policy it submitted to the authorities as no amendment to the 
special condition has been carried out between the parties.
5.5.	 That as per the DGS Notice No. 03/2008, the foul weather 
season starts on 1st June, and the policy was valid from 
16.05.2013 to 15.06.2013. 
5.6.	 That no statement was made in the application by the 
Appellant regarding its intention to set sail in the foul season. 
5.7.	 The Respondent has also placed reliance on the judgements 
of this Court, namely, Sea Lark Fisheries v. United India 
Insurance Co. & Anr. (2008) 4 SCC 131; Deokar Exports 
(P) Ltd. v New India Assurance Co. Ltd. (2008) 14 SCC 
598; Contship Container Lines Ltd. v. D.K. Lall & Ors. 
(2010) 4 SCC 256; Rajankumar & Brothers (Impex) v. 
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. (2020) 4 SCC 364; and Hind 
Offshore (P) Ltd. v. Iffco-Tokio General Insurance Co. 
Ltd. (2023) 9 SCC 407.
Discussion and Analysis
6.	
We have given our careful consideration to the submissions made 
on both sides of the bar, and perused the materials provided. The 
only question which falls for our consideration is, whether, the special 
condition stands breached justifying the de facto repudiation of the 
Appellant’s claim by the Respondent. 
40
Supreme Court Reports
7.	
At this juncture, it would be appropriate to consider the conditions 
in the proposal, upon which the Respondent relies to repudiate the 
claim of the Appellant. Firstly, the ‘Special Conditions’ in the ‘Policy 
Schedule for Voyage Insurance’ provides that:
“Subject to 1) institute voyage clause 01.08.1989 
2) express 1% of S.I. with the warranty that the voyage 
should commence & complete before monsoon sets in.”
8.	
Under ‘Voyage Details’ the Appellant mentions the voyage to be 
undertaken from “Mumbai to Kolkata”. ‘Special Warranties’ stipulates 
as under:
“Vessel to depart in local weather condition not exceeding 
Beaufort Scale No. 4 & favourable synoptic meterological 
situation. The master to exercise his discretion to alter 
course & speed or to enter port of refuge/shelter in case 
of adverse weather sea conditions/weather warings 
emergency/navigational hazard. The relevant national & 
international regulations regarding lights, ags & shapes 
should be complied with.”
9.	
Further, Clause 3 of the Insurance Contract provides:
“3. CLASSIFICATION
3.1 It is the duty of the Assured, Owners and Managers at 
the inception of and throughout the period of this insurance 
to ensure that
3.1.1 the vessel is classed with a Classification Society 
agreed by the Underwriters and that her class within that 
Society is maintained,
3.1.2 any recommendations requirements or restrictions 
imposed by the vessel’s Classification Society 
which relate to the vessel’s seaworthiness or to her 
maintenance in a seaworthy condition are complied 
with by the dates required by that Society.
3.2 In the event of any breach of the duties set out in Clause 
3.1 above, unless the Underwriters agree to the contrary 
in writing, they will be discharged from liability under this 
insurance as from the date of the breach provided that if the 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
41
Sohom Shipping Pvt. Ltd. v.  
M/s The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. & Anr.
vessel is at sea at such date the Underwriters’ discharge 
from liability is deferred until arrival at her next port.”
(emphasis supplied)
10.	 The Respondent has relied upon Clause 3.1.2 and the breach of the 
special condition contained in the policy to justify the repudiation of 
the Insurance Contract. 
11.	 It is trite to state that the interpretation of the Insurance Contract 
falls upon the same principles as the interpretation of any contract, 
except that there exists a requirement of uberrima fides, i.e. good 
faith on part of the assured. It is therefore well-settled that the policy 
and all the terms therein ought to be construed strictly, to the extent 
possible.
12.	 We now proceed to interpret the phrase “before monsoon sets in” 
as contained in the ‘Special Conditions’ under the policy. A literal 
interpretation reflects that this phrase refers to an event occurring 
before monsoon commences or begins. In order to assist us further, 
both parties have relied on a circular dated 25.04.2008 published 
by the DGS (hereinafter “the DGS Circular”) delineating the foul 
weather period. The same is reproduced below:
“3.1 During the period of foul weather, being 1st June till 
31st August in the Arabian Sea along the West Coast and 
1st May till November in the Bay of Bengal along the East 
Coast of the Indian Peninsula.”
Accordingly, foul weather first arrives in the East Coast on 1st May and 
thereafter on the West Coast on 1st June. The correct interpretation of 
the phrase would then entail that the requisite event is to occur before 
the 1st of May or the 1st of June respectively, depending on the coast. 
13.	 We straightaway deal with the argument of the Appellant that the 
special condition is ambiguous leading to it being construed contra 
proferentum. The common law rule of interpreting the clause against 
the maker of the contract in case of ambiguity has been well adopted 
into the Indian legal framework. In the case of Chandumull Jain 
(supra), the Supreme Court observed:
“11. …In other respects there is no difference between a 
contract of insurance and any other contract except that in 
42
Supreme Court Reports
a contract of insurance there is a requirement of uberrima 
fides i.e., good faith on the part of the assured and the 
contract is likely to be construed contra proferentem that 
is against the company in case of ambiguity or doubt.”
14.	 It is the case of New India Assurance (2016) (supra) that expounded 
on the principle and rejected its application in the facts of that case. 
The relevant portion is extracted below:
“10. We proceed to deal with the submission made by 
counsel for the Appellant regarding the rule of contra 
proferentem. The Common Law rule of construction “verba 
chartarum fortius accipiuntur contra proferentem” means 
that ambiguity in the wording of the policy is to be resolved 
against the party who prepared it. MacGillivray on Insurance 
Law deals with the rule of contra proferentem as follows:
“The contra proferentem rule of construction 
arises only where there is a wording employed 
by those drafting the clause which leaves the 
court unable to decide by ordinary principles of 
interpretation which of two meanings is the right 
one. One must not use the rule to create the 
ambiguity – one must find the ambiguity first. 
The words should receive their ordinary and 
natural meaning unless that is displaced by a 
real ambiguity either appearing on the face of 
the policy or, possibly, by extrinsic evidence of 
surrounding circumstances.”
11. Colinvaux’s Law of Insurance propounds the contra 
proferentem rule as under:
“Quite apart from contradictory clauses in 
policies, ambiguities are common in them and 
it is often very uncertain what the parties to 
them mean. In such cases the rule is that the 
policy, being drafted in language chosen by the 
insurers, must be taken most strongly against 
them. It is construed contra proferentes, against 
those who offer it. In a doubtful case the turn of 
the scale ought to be given against the speaker, 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
43
Sohom Shipping Pvt. Ltd. v.  
M/s The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. & Anr.
because he has not clearly and fully expressed 
himself. Nothing is easier than for the insurers to 
express themselves in plain terms. The assured 
cannot put his own meaning upon a policy, but, 
where it is ambiguous, it is to be construed in 
the sense in which he might reasonably have 
understood it. If the insurers wish to escape 
liability under given circumstances, they must 
use words admitting of no possible doubt.
But a clause is only to be contra proferentes in 
cases of real ambiguity. One must not use the 
rule to create an ambiguity. One must find the 
ambiguity first. Even where a clause by itself is 
ambiguous if, by looking at the whole policy, its 
meaning becomes clear, there is no room for 
the application of the doctrine. So also where 
if one meaning is given to a clause, the rest of 
the policy becomes clear, the policy should be 
construed accordingly.” 
(emphasis supplied)
15.	 As per the aforementioned rule, we are unable to find that the 
special condition contained in the policy is ambiguous per se. As 
demonstrated above, the policy can be construed literally, wherein the 
special condition envisages the voyage to be started and completed 
before the monsoon/foul weather season commences. The Appellant 
has attempted to introduce ambiguity in the condition by bringing in 
external factors and considerations, which is impermissible under 
the rule of contra proferentum. The said rule only applies to cases of 
real ambiguity, where the clause by itself is ambiguous irrespective 
of any external considerations. Accordingly, we find no ambiguity in 
the text of the policy itself. However, the rejection of the applicability 
of the rule of contra proferentum does not prejudice the case of the 
Appellant on the counts of validity and materiality of the condition itself.
16.	 Mr. Kamat has placed before us the proposal form filled by the 
Appellant, to submit that no statement was made therein regarding 
its intention to set sail in the foul season. It is argued that in response 
to the question stating “Will the vessel be laid up during the South 
44
Supreme Court Reports
West or North East Monsoon? If so, please state (a) where she will 
be laid up; and (b) period for which she will laid up”, the Appellant 
has answered “At Kolkata Harbour”. It is then to be concluded that 
during the foul season, the Vessel will be laid up and not undertake 
the voyage. Accordingly, it is submitted that the doctrine of uberrima 
fides has been compromised on account of the Appellant’s conduct.
17.	 In response, Mr. Ahmadi has stated that in the proposal form it is 
mentioned that “the insurance is required to undertake delivery voyage 
from Ghodbunder Jetty to Kolkata harbour” and the insurance period 
is from 16.05.2013 to 15.06.2013. 
18.	 There is no doubt that the policy was taken for a period of one month 
(16.05.2013 to 15.06.2013) to cover the voyage from Mumbai to 
Kolkata. Further, as per the DGS Circular, foul weather commences 
on 1st May itself on the East Coast. The Respondent’s contention 
that they had no knowledge of the voyage and that they believed 
that the Vessel would be laid up at the Kolkata harbour during the 
foul season is unacceptable and is to be rejected. The Appellant 
had mentioned in the form that the purpose of insurance is to 
undertake the voyage from Ghodbunder Jetty in Mumbai to Kolkata 
harbour. The only logical conclusion of the information provided is 
that the insurance was availed to cover the foul weather period 
along the west and east coast. Even if the voyage was undertaken 
immediately, i.e. on 16.05.2013, the Vessel would have arrived at 
the Kolkata harbour in the first week of June 2013, i.e. after the 
commencement of foul weather season on the east coast. There is 
absolutely no permutation and combination in which the Appellant 
could have fulfilled this condition under the policy, given its voyage 
from Mumbai (west coast) to Kolkata (east coast) via several coastal 
States. Further, the special condition necessitates that the voyage 
commences and is completed before monsoon sets in. If the condition 
is to be interpreted strictly, then the assured would be unable to 
make a claim in case of a marine accident where the vessel is 
unable to complete its voyage due to a peril, rendering the special 
condition impossible to comply with. Ultimately, the assured would 
be without any remedy under the insurance. This amounts to an 
absurdity, vitiating the very purpose behind an insurance contract. 
As a result, we hold that the special condition cannot be treated as 
a condition precedent to waive any liability under the policy. It has 
been impliedly waived by the parties due to its non-material nature. 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
45
Sohom Shipping Pvt. Ltd. v.  
M/s The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. & Anr.
It is probably a term used in all contracts by the Respondent as a 
part of its standard form, and it failed to exclude the same from the 
policy availed of by the Appellant. 
19.	 In a similar case, the policy required the assured to prove the claim 
within forty days from the date of the policy itself. The Court, in Ramji 
Karamsi (supra) allowed the claim of the assured to stand despite 
the breach of the condition therein by observing that the term was 
not a condition precedent to the plaintiff being entitled to maintain 
his claim. The Court opined:
“28… But the term of the policy which has been relied 
upon by the defendants would mean that the claim must 
be formally made and proved by the assured within 40 
days thereof, i.e., the policy which would, taking the date of 
the policy as 21-4-1943, bring this period of 40 days up to 
31-5-1943. Even though the loss be incurred on 3-6-1943, 
the assured would be without a remedy, because he would 
not have formally submitted and proved his claim by 31-5-
1943, which he ought to have done if his claim was to be a 
good claim, having regard to this term of the policy. A more 
absurd result could not possibly be conceived. It could never 
be intended by any men in their senses that when the risk 
of the policy was to run right up to 4-6-1943, and the loss 
which occurred on or before that date would be considered 
by the insurance company, the insurance company would 
be relieved of all liability because on a strict interpretation 
of this term which is relied upon by them and submitted 
by them to be a condition precedent, the assured could 
in no event make the claim before 31-5-1943. I decline to 
entertain any further discussion on this point…”
20.	 In view of our findings, the Respondent is not entitled to repudiate the 
claim of the Appellant on the ground of breach of the special condition. 
We are cognisant of the fact that the Respondent has raised several 
other objections, including allegations of forgery and breach of other 
conditions, which may affect the sum awarded. However, the same 
would have to be looked into on its own merits and proved before 
the NCDRC. 
21.	 Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the impugned order dated 
13.04.2021 passed by the NCDRC is set aside. The matter is remanded 
46
Supreme Court Reports
to the NCDRC with a direction to determine the extent of the insured 
sum liable to be paid by the Respondent to the Appellant. Since the 
parties are represented by their respective counsel, they shall appear 
before NCDRC on 29.04.2025, without expecting separate notices 
from NCDRC. The matter may be considered expeditiously by NCDRC 
as the claim was made by the Appellant herein in the year 2013. 
22.	 Parties to bear their own costs. Pending applications, if any, shall 
stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan