[2025] 5 S.C.R. 23 : 2025 INSC 457
Jaspal Singh Kaural 
v. 
The State of NCT of Delhi & Anr.
Criminal Appeal No. 1841 of 2025
07 April 2025
[B.V. Nagarathna and Satish Chandra Sharma,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Appellant established physical relationship with the complainant 
on promise of marriage. Complainant obtained divorce from her 
husband on the assurance of the appellant that he will marry her. 
Later, on refusal of the appellant to marry her, complainant lodged 
FIR u/ss.376 and 506 IPC. The Sessions Court discharged the 
appellant. High Court set aside the order of discharge. The issue 
for consideration was whether there was sufficient material on 
record for the Sessions Court to have discharged the appellant 
for offences under ss.376 and 506 IPC.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 - ss.375, 376 – Mere establishing of physical 
relations pursuant to a promise to marry – Will not amount to 
rape in every case:
Held: An offence under Section 375 IPC could only be made out, 
if promise of marriage was made by the accused solely with a view 
to obtain consent for sexual relations without having any intent of 
fulfilling said promise from the very beginning, and that such false 
promise of marriage had a direct bearing on the prosecutrix giving 
her consent for sexual relations. [Para 14]
Penal Code, 1860 - ss.376 and 506 – Prosecutrix was in a 
consensual physical relationship with accused-appellant – No 
element of force or deceit in the relationship – Ingredients of 
offences u/ss.375/506 IPC not established:
Held: On facts, physical relationship between Appellant and 
Respondent no. 2-prosecutrix was consensual – Even if the case of 
the prosecutrix is accepted, there is no material on record to show 
that there was any dishonest inducement, or incitement on part of 
* Author
24
Supreme Court Reports
the Appellant – There is also no material on record, to establish 
an offence of criminal intimidation under section 506 IPC against 
the Appellant – In the eventuality of a fall-out or split between the 
parties, it cannot be said that the promise to marry was false, and 
the corresponding conduct dishonest – The prolonged period of the 
relationship, during which the sexual relations continued between 
the parties, is sufficient to conclude that there was never an element 
of force or deceit in the relationship. [Para 15]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.227 – Discharge – Trial at 
the time of framing charge – Scope of revisional jurisdiction:
Held: On facts, there was sufficient material on record for the 
Sessions Court to exercise powers under Section 227 of CrPC, 
and discharge the Appellant – At the time of framing of charge, a 
mini trial is not permissible and the Trial Court has to proceed with 
the material brought on record by the prosecution and determine 
whether the facts emerging from the material taken on its face 
value, disclose the existence of the ingredients necessary of the 
offence alleged – High Court undertook an exhaustive analysis of 
the allegations while failing to consider that at the stage of framing of 
charges, the court must only adjudicate on the basis of material on 
record – Scope of interference and exercise of revisional jurisdiction 
is extremely limited – In the present matter, findings of sessions 
court are based on material on record – Order passed by sessions 
court upheld. [Paras 16, 17]
Case Law Cited
Naim Ahmed v State (NCT) of Delhi [2023] 1 SCR 1061: [2023] 15 
SCC 385 – held applicable.
Mahesh Damu Khare v. The State of Maharashtra and Anr., 2024 
SCC OnLine SC 3471; Prashant v. State of NCT Delhi, 2024 SCC 
Online SC 3375; Pramod Suryabhan Pawar v. State of Maharashtra 
[2019] 11 SCR 423 : (2019) 9 SCC 608; State of Rajasthan v. Ashok 
Kumar Kashyap [2021] 4 SCR 158 : 2021 SCC Online SC 314; 
State of Tamil Nadu v. N. Suresh Rajan and Others [2014] 1 SCR 
135 : (2014) 11 SCC 709 – relied on.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
25
Jaspal Singh Kaural v. The State of NCT of Delhi & Anr.
List of Keywords
Promise to marry; Criminal intimidation; False promise to marry; 
Consensual physical relationship; Framing of charge; Mini trial at 
the time of framing charge; Scope of revisional jurisdiction; Grossly 
erroneous decision; Non-compliance of provisions of law; Finding 
based on no evidence; Judicial discretion exercised arbitrarily/
perversely.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 1841 
of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 03.01.2024 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in CRLREVP No. 1161 of 2023
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Shekhar Nanavaty, Jitesh Kumar Singh, Shubham Dhyani,  
Ms. Shikha Gupta, Rameshwar Prasad Goyal.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Mrs. Archana Pathak Dave, Sr. Adv./A.S.G., Ms. Samridhi Arora, 
Ms. Sanjana, Mukesh Kumar Maroria, Navin Kumar, Ms. Shagun 
Thakur, Sudhakar Kulwant, Ms. Astha Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Satish Chandra Sharma, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
The Appellant has approached this Court being aggrieved by the 
Impugned Order dt. 03.01.2024 passed by the High Court of Delhi 
in Criminal Revision Petition no. 1161/2023, whereby the Order dt. 
08.06.2023 passed by the Ld. Additional Sessions Judge/Spl. FTC 
Patiala House Courts, New Delhi [“Ld. Sessions Court”] discharging 
the Appellant in FIR no. 281/2021 dt. 05.06.2021 registered at PS 
Sagarpur, U/s 376/506 IPC (“FIR”), was set aside.
3.	
The captioned FIR came to be registered at the behest of the 
Complainant/Respondent no.2, alleging that the Appellant had 
26
Supreme Court Reports
established physical relations with her, with the promise to marry 
her, and take care of her two children. The Complaint reveals, that 
the Appellant was known to the prosecutrix since 2011, prior to their 
respective marriages; however, their love re-kindled in 2016, once 
their matrimonial lives became unsettled. 
4.	
It is the case of the Complainant/Respondent no.2 that she was in a 
relationship with the Appellant since 2016, who was living in Canada 
at the time, and had come to India, and met her for the first time on 
05.02.2017. On that day, he had met the Complainant/Respondent 
no. 2 in his brother’s rental house in Dwarka and established physical 
relationship with her on the promise that he will marry her after obtaining 
divorce from his first wife. It is alleged that the Appellant harassed 
the Complainant into obtaining a divorce from her husband, and had 
subsequently, also spoken to & assured the first husband, that he 
would marry the Complainant/Respondent no.2 and take good care 
of her and her children. 
5.	
The Appellant purportedly lived with the Respondent no. 2 at her house 
for twenty five days, where he sexually harassed her, and told her that 
if she refused to establish physical relations with him, he would not 
marry her. The Complainant has alleged that she obtained divorce from 
her husband in 2019, on the assurance from the Appellant, that he will 
marry her; however, on 20.05.2021, the Appellant refused to marry her 
and even threatened to kill her children. Subsequently thereof, the FIR 
no. 281/2021 dt. 05.06.2021 was registered upon the Complaint filed 
by the Complainant/Respondent no.2, when the Appellant failed to 
appear before the Mahila Police Station for counselling and mediation. 
6.	
During the investigation, the Appellant admitted to having physical 
relations with the Complainant/Respondent no.2, and paying for the 
mangalsutra with his initials “Jas” on them. The investigation finally 
culminated into a charge-sheet on 15.05.2022, under Sections 376/506 
IPC against the Appellant. 
7.	
The Appellant filed an Application under Section 227 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (for short ‘CrPC’) seeking discharge, 
whereby the Ld. Sessions Court vide Order dt. 08.06.2023, was pleased 
to discharge the Appellant of the offences under Section 376/506 
IPC. It was observed by the Ld. Sessions Court that consent by 
prosecutrix was very well reasoned and was given after understanding 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
27
Jaspal Singh Kaural v. The State of NCT of Delhi & Anr.
the nature and consequence of sexual indulgence and not out of any 
misconception of fact. 
8.	
Aggrieved thereby, the Complainant/Respondent no.2 filed a Criminal 
Revision Petition no. 1161/2023 before the Hon’ble Delhi High Court, 
which was allowed vide Impugned Judgment dt. 03.01.2024. Vide the 
Impugned Order dt. 03.01.2024, the High Court whilst assailing the 
order on discharge, made specific observations holding that there 
is prima-facie material to establish that the Appellant had indulged 
in sexual relationship with the Complainant/Respondent, with the 
promise to marry her, and frame charges against the Appellant, for 
offences under U/s 376/506 IPC in FIR no. 281/2021. The Impugned 
Order dt. 03.01.2024 is under challenge before this Court. 
9.	
The Learned Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the relationship 
between the Appellant and the Complainant/Respondent was purely 
consensual, and there is no question of an offence either under 
Section 376 IPC or 506 IPC. A perusal of the FIR and the charge-sheet 
would establish that there is no material on record, to establish that 
the Complainant/Respondent no. 2 had entered into a relationship 
with the Appellant, under coercion or undue influence, or under the 
mistaken belief or a false assurance of marriage. 
10.	 It is also argued that the Respondent no.2/Complainant was very 
well aware of the consequences, of her actions, and had reasonably 
considered them before entering in a relationship with the Appellant. 
As a matter of fact, it is the own case of the Respondent no.2/
Complainant, that she was in a relationship with the Appellant since 
2016, while both the parties were in subsisting marriages. Thus, the 
element of inducement for marriage by the Appellant is manifestly 
absent and the criminal proceedings registered against the Appellant 
tantamount to a gross abuse of the process of law. 
11.	 On the other hand, it is argued by the prosecutrix, that she had 
entered into a physical relationship with the Appellant solely for 
the reason that he had promised to marry her & take care of her 
children, and had it not been for the promise of marriage made by the 
Appellant she would have never entered into a physical relationship 
with him. It was submitted that the Appellant had not only promised 
the prosecutrix, but also her family, and her ex-husband, that that 
he will marry her and take care of the children. It was owing to such 
conduct of the Appellant that the prosecutrix got divorced from her 
28
Supreme Court Reports
ex-husband, leaving aside her matrimonial life for him. It is submitted 
that the conduct of the Appellant amounts to a dishonest inducement, 
and the physical relationship on a false pretext amounts to rape. 
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION
12.	 We have heard counsel for both the parties and have carefully 
considered the Impugned Order and the material on record. The 
intervention of this Hon’ble Court is limited to the question as to 
whether there was sufficient material on record, for the Sessions 
Court to have discharged the Appellant for offences under section 376 
and 506 IPC, arising out of FIR bearing no. 281/2021 dt. 05.06.2021 
registered at PS Sagarpur. 
13.	 At the outset, we refer to the ratio in the case of Naim Ahmed Vs 
State (NCT) of Delhi1 whereby this Hon’ble Court had decided a 
similar matter, wherein allegedly, the prosecutrix had also given her 
consent for a sexual relationship with the accused/Appellant, upon 
an assurance to marry. The prosecutrix, who was herself a married 
woman having three children, had continued to have such relationship 
with the accused Appellant, at least for about five years till she gave 
the complaint. In the conspectus of such facts and circumstances, 
this Court had observed as under: 
“21.  The bone of contention raised on behalf of the 
respondents is that the prosecutrix had given her consent 
for sexual relationship under the misconception of fact, as 
the accused had given a false promise to marry her and 
subsequently he did not marry, and therefore such consent 
was no consent in the eye of the law and the case fell 
under Clause Secondly of Section 375IPC. In this regard, 
it is pertinent to note that there is a difference between 
giving a false promise and committing breach of promise 
by the accused. In case of false promise, the accused right 
from the beginning would not have any intention to marry 
the prosecutrix and would have cheated or deceited the 
prosecutrix by giving a false promise to marry her only 
with a view to satisfy his lust, whereas in case of breach 
1	
(2023) 15 SCC 385
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
29
Jaspal Singh Kaural v. The State of NCT of Delhi & Anr.
of promise, one cannot deny a possibility that the accused 
might have given a promise with all seriousness to marry 
her, and subsequently might have encountered certain 
circumstances unforeseen by him or the circumstances 
beyond his control, which prevented him to fulfil his promise. 
So, it would be a folly to treat each breach of promise to 
marry as a false promise and to prosecute a person for 
the offence under Section 376. As stated earlier, each 
case would depend upon its proved facts before the court.
22. In the instant case, the prosecutrix who herself was a 
married woman having three children, could not be said to 
have acted under the alleged false promise given by the 
appellant or under the misconception of fact while giving 
the consent to have sexual relationship with the appellant. 
Undisputedly, she continued to have such relationship with 
him at least for about five years till she gave complaint 
in the year 2015. Even if the allegations made by her in 
her deposition before the court, are taken on their face 
value, then also to construe such allegations as “rape” 
by the appellant, would be stretching the case too far. 
The prosecutrix being a married woman and the mother 
of three children was mature and intelligent enough to 
understand the significance and the consequences of the 
moral or immoral quality of act she was consenting to. 
Even otherwise, if her entire conduct during the course 
of such relationship with the accused, is closely seen, it 
appears that she had betrayed her husband and three 
children by having relationship with the accused, for whom 
she had developed liking for him. She had gone to stay 
with him during the subsistence of her marriage with her 
husband, to live a better life with the accused. Till the time 
she was impregnated by the accused in the year 2011, 
and she gave birth to a male child through the loin of 
the accused, she did not have any complaint against the 
accused of he having given false promise to marry her or 
having cheated her. She also visited the native place of 
the accused in the year 2012 and came to know that he 
was a married man having children also, still she continued 
to live with the accused at another premises without any 
30
Supreme Court Reports
grievance. She even obtained divorce from her husband 
by mutual consent in 2014, leaving her three children with 
her husband. It was only in the year 2015 when some 
disputes must have taken place between them, that she 
filed the present complaint. The accused in his further 
statement recorded under Section 313 CrPC had stated 
that she had filed the complaint as he refused to fulfil her 
demand to pay her huge amount. Thus, having regard 
to the facts and circumstances of the case, it could not 
be said by any stretch of imagination that the prosecutrix 
had given her consent for the sexual relationship with the 
appellant under the misconception of fact, so as to hold 
the appellant guilty of having committed rape within the 
meaning of Section 375 IPC.”
14.	 The decision in Naim Ahmed (supra) is squarely applicable to the 
conspectus of present case. It has been time and again settled by 
this Hon’ble Court, that the mere fact that physical relations were 
established pursuant to a promise to marry will not amount to a rape 
in every case. An offence under Section 375 IPC could only be made 
out, if promise of marriage was made by the accused solely with a 
view to obtain consent for sexual relations without having any intent 
of fulfilling said promise from the very beginning, and that such false 
promise of marriage had a direct bearing on the prosecutrix giving 
her consent for sexual relations.2
15.	 Upon a bare perusal of the FIR and the charge-sheet, the following 
facts are clearly established:
(i)	
The physical relationship between the Appellant and the 
Respondent no. 2 was consensual from the very beginning and 
cannot be said to be against the will or without the consent of 
the prosecutrix. Even if the case of the prosecutrix is accepted, 
there is no material on record to show that there was any 
dishonest inducement, or incitement on part of the Appellant. 
(ii)	
There is also no material on record, to establish an offence of 
criminal intimidation under section 506 IPC against the Appellant. 
In-fact, it is apparent from the conduct of the Appellant, that he 
2	
Mahesh Damu Khare v. The State of Maharashtra and Anr., 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3471
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
31
Jaspal Singh Kaural v. The State of NCT of Delhi & Anr.
was acting in furtherance of the promise to marry. It is the own 
observation of the High Court, that the Appellant had made a 
promise to marry the Respondent no.2 and was acting accordingly. 
The Mangalsutra being prepared with the initials of the name 
of the Complainant/Respondent no.2 does reflect his intention 
and promise to marry. However, in the eventuality of a fall-out 
or split between the parties, it cannot be said that the promise 
to marry was false, and the corresponding conduct dishonest. 
(iii)	 There is also no element of criminality that can be accrued to 
the Appellant, insofar as it is the own case of the prosecutrix, 
that she was in a relationship with the Appellant, while being in a 
subsisting marriage. It is also hard to believe that the prosecutrix 
could have sustained a physical relationship for a prolonged 
period of five years,3 while being in a subsisting marriage, and 
even subsequently obtaining divorce to sustain the relationship. 
The prolonged period of the relationship, during which the 
sexual relations continued between the parties, is sufficient to 
conclude that there was never an element of force or deceit 
in the relationship.4 The prosecutrix was thus, conscious and 
cognizant of the consequences of her actions, and had given 
her consent after an active and reasoned deliberation.5
16.	 In view of the aforesaid, we find that there was sufficient material 
on record for the Ld. Sessions Court to exercise powers under 
section 227 CrPC, and discharge the Appellant. It is trite law that 
at the time of framing of charge, a mini trial is not permissible6 and 
the Trial Court has to proceed with the material brought on record 
by the prosecution and determine whether the facts emerging from 
the material taken on its face value, disclose the existence of the 
ingredients necessary of the offence alleged.7 A bare review of the 
FIR and the charge-sheet and material placed on record by the 
prosecution, would clarify that the ingredients of offences under 
Section 375/506 IPC are not established. 
3	
Prashant Vs State of NCT Delhi, 2024 SCC Online SC 3375
4	
Mahesh Damu Khare Vs State of Maharashtra and Anr., 2024] SCC Online SC 3471
5	
Pramod Suryabhan Pawar vs State of Maharashtra (2019) 9 SCC 608
6	
State of Rajasthan vs Ashok Kumar Kashyap, 2021 SCC Online SC 314
7	
State of Tamil Nadu Vs. N. Suresh Rajan And Others (2014) 11 SCC 709
32
Supreme Court Reports
17.	 We also find that the High Court has undertaken an exhaustive 
analysis of the allegations in the FIR, and the Charge-sheet, while 
failing to consider that at the stage of framing of charges, the court 
must only adjudicate on the basis of material on record. It is trite law 
that the scope of interference and exercise of revisional jurisdiction is 
extremely limited and should be exercised very sparingly, specifically 
in instances, where the decision under challenge is grossly erroneous, 
or there is non-compliance of the provisions of law, or the finding 
recorded by the trial court is based on no evidence, or material 
evidence is ignored or judicial discretion is exercised arbitrarily or 
perversely by framing the charge. This is certainly not the case in 
the present matter insofar as the findings of the Ld. Sessions Court 
are based on the material on record. 
18.	 For the reasons stated above, we allow this appeal and set aside 
the order of the High Court dated 03.01.2024 and uphold the Order 
dt. 08.06.2023 passed by the Sessions Court. At this stage, we deem 
it appropriate to terminate the criminal proceedings arising out of 
FIR bearing no. 281/2021 dt. 05.06.2021 registered at PS Sagarpur, 
U/s 376/506 IPC against the Appellant. 
19.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. No order as 
to costs. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Bibhuti Bhushan Bose