[2025] 6 S.C.R. 141 : 2025 INSC 625
The Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance 
 Company Limited 
v. 
Smt. Honnamma & Ors.
R1: Smt. Honnamma 
R2: Kum. Bhagya 
R3: Kum. Ramya 
R4: Sri H. Nagaraj
(Civil Appeal No. 6336 of 2025) 
05 May 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia and Ahsanuddin Amanullah,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to the correctness of the order passed by the High 
Court partly allowing the appeal of the respondents, enhancing the 
compensation and fastening the liability on the insurance company.
Headnotes†
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 – s.147 – Fatal accident – 
Compensation – Liability of the insurance company – Tractor 
insured with the appellant-insurance company attached to a 
trailer, and due to rash and negligent driving of the driver, tractor 
and trailer toppled, person on the trailer, fell off the trailer, 
resulting in his death – Claimants-wife and minor daughters 
claimed compensation – Tribunal granted compensation of 
Rs.9,50,000/- and held that risk of employee of the tractor and 
trailer was not statutorily covered and fastened the liability 
to satisfy the award on the owner and the driver – Claimants 
sought enhancement of compensation – High Court enhanced 
compensation to Rs.13,28,940/- and fastened the liability of 
compensation on the appellant – Correctness: 
Held: If an insured vehicle hits another vehicle which in turn hits 
a third vehicle, then for the entire chain of accidents, the liability 
would pass on to the vehicle which was the root cause of the 
accident because it is the result of the action in the same chain 
* Author
142
Supreme Court Reports
of events which cannot be segregated or compartmentalized – 
Court is duty-bound to be mindful of the ground realities and 
cannot let practicality be overshadowed by technicality – On 
facts, the main cause of the accident was the tractor which 
was pulling/driving/moving the trailer and in such sequence of 
events, the trailer upturned – Thus, the accident was caused by 
the tractor, as during the course of being driven/pulled by the 
tractor, the accident occurred – Liability of the tractor/its insurer 
extended to the accident caused by the tractor resulting in the 
death of the deceased, through the trailer – Appellant ought not 
to be saddled with payment of compensation exceeding what 
the insurance policy provides for or the limit, if any, set under 
any law, whichever be the higher amount of the two – Amount 
exclusively payable by the appellant, however, in no case be less 
than Rs.9,50,000/- – No infirmity in the impugned order, either 
with regard to the quantum of compensation awarded or fixation 
of liability on the insurer-appellant for the accident. [Paras 11, 
12, 18, 19]
Case Law Cited
United India Insurance Co. Ltd., Kadapa District v. Koduru 
Bhagyamma, 2007 SCC OnLine AP 830 – approved. 
Sarla Verma v. Delhi Transport Corporation [2009] 5 SCR 1098 : 
(2009) 6 SCC 121; New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. C M Jaya 
[2002] 1 SCR 298 : (2002) 2 SCC 278; Dhondubai v. Hanmantappa 
Bandappa Gandigude Since Deceased Through His LRs & Ors. 
Civil Appeal Nos. 5459-5460/2023; Ningamma v. United India 
Insurance Co. Ltd. [2009] 8 SCR 683 : (2009) 13 SCC 710;  
K Ramya v. National Insurance Co. Ltd. [2022] 18 SCR 238 : 
2022 SCC OnLine SC 1338; Shivaleela v. Divisional Manager, 
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. [2025] 4 SCR 63 : 2025 SCC 
OnLine SC 563; Oriental Insurance Co. Limited v. Brij Mohan 
[2007] 6 SCR 843 : (2007) 7 SCC 56; New India Assurance Co. 
Ltd. v. Shantibai [1995] 1 SCR 871 : (1995) 2 SCC 539; Amrit 
Lal Sood v. Kaushalya Thapar [1998] 2 SCR 284 : (1998) 3 SCC 
744 – referred to.
List of Acts
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
143
The Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance Company Limited v. 
Smt. Honnamma & Ors.
List of Keywords
Motor accident; Death; Compensation; Beneficial and welfare-
oriented legislation; Liability of insurance company; Trailer attached 
to tractor; Chain of events; Root cause of accident; Events which 
cannot be segregated or compartmentalised; Maximum amount 
payable; Recover differential amount; Total compensation awarded 
less maximum amount payable; Enhancement of compensation; 
Rash and negligent driving of the driver; Fixation of liability on the 
insurer for the accident.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 6336 of  
2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.11.2022 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bengaluru in MFA No. 3659 of 2014
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
G. Balaji, Neeleshwar Pavani.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Ahsanuddin Amanullah, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeal mounts a challenge against the Final Judgment 
and Order dated 25.11.2022 in MFA No.3659/2014 (MV-D) (hereinafter 
referred to as the ‘Impugned Order’) passed by a learned Single 
Judge of the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru (hereinafter 
referred to as the ‘High Court’), whereby the appeal filed by 
the Respondents No.1 to 3 (herein) was partly allowed and the 
compensation awarded vide Award dated 02.04.2014 passed by 
the learned Senior Civil Judge & Member, Additional Motor Accident 
Claims Tribunal, Harihar (hereinafter referred to as the ‘MACT’) was 
enhanced from Rs.9,50,000/- (Rupees Nine Lakhs Fifty Thousand) 
to Rs.13,28,940/- (Rupees Thirteen Lakhs Twenty-Eight Thousand 
144
Supreme Court Reports
Nine Hundred and Forty) keeping the interest component intact i.e., 
6% per annum and liability was fastened on the Appellant (herein) 
to pay such compensation.
BRIEF FACTS:
3.	
On 29.02.2012, the deceased-Nagarajappa was travelling in a tractor 
and trailer as a coolie in order to unload the soil, which was loaded 
thereon. Due to the rash and negligent driving of the Respondent 
No.5 (herein), the tractor and trailer toppled causing injuries to the 
deceased-Nagarajappa, ultimately leading to his death. The wife 
and two minor daughters (Respondents No.1, 2 and 3 herein) of 
the deceased filed M.V.C. No.121/2012 before the MACT claiming a 
compensation of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs). The claimants 
in support of their case examined Respondent no.1, the wife of the 
deceased, as PW1 and got marked the documents as Exs.P1 to 
P10. On the other hand, the Appellant examined two witnesses as 
RW1 and RW2 and got marked the documents as Exs.R1 to R7 i.e., 
authority letter, policy schedule, charge-sheet, notice, agreement 
and RC books. The MACT after considering the evidence on record, 
partly allowed the claim vide Award dated 02.04.2014 and awarded a 
compensation of Rs.9,50,000/- (Rupees Nine Lakhs Fifty Thousand) 
with interest at 6% per annum from the date of filing of the petition 
till its realization. The MACT held that the risk of employee of the 
tractor and trailer was not statutorily covered under Section 147(1)
(b) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the 
‘MV Act’) and fastened the liability to satisfy the award on the owner 
(Respondent No.4 herein) and the driver. 
4.	
The claimants filed appeal bearing MFA No.3659 of 2014 (MV-D) 
before the High Court seeking enhancement of the compensation. 
On due consideration of the material before it, the High Court vide 
the Impugned Order partly allowed the appeal and enhanced the 
compensation to Rs.13,28,940/- (Rupees Thirteen Lakhs Twenty-
Eight Thousand Nine Hundred and Forty) payable with 6% per annum 
interest from the date of petition till deposit. While doing so, the 
High Court fastened the liability of compensation on the Appellant-
insurance company. Aggrieved thereby, the Appellant has filed the 
present appeal.
5.	
The appeal qua Respondent No.5-driver stands dismissed in terms of 
Order dated 20.02.2024 passed by the learned Judge-in-Chambers. 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
145
The Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance Company Limited v. 
Smt. Honnamma & Ors.
Despite due service of notice to Respondents No.1, 2, 3 and 4, none 
appeared to represent them. 
APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS:
6.	
At the outset, learned counsel for the appellant argued that the 
MACT had holistically appreciated the facts and circumstances of 
the case and had exempted the appellant from incurring any liability 
of compensation, which aspect has been erroneously reversed by 
the High Court in the Impugned Order on unsustainable grounds. It 
was submitted that the insurance policy did not extend any coverage, 
either to the trailer or employees of the owner or any passenger 
travelling on the trailer. Despite categorical options for risk-coverage 
of these categories of persons/trailer(s), it was not subscribed to by 
the Respondent No.4-owner/policy-holder. 
7.	
It was argued that the High Court took a very naive and simplistic 
view of the matter ignoring the concerned respondent’s categorical 
admission regarding rash driving. Further, the High Court ignored that 
the Respondents No.4 and 5 had accepted the order of the MACT 
dated 02.04.2014 as they had not challenged the decision. It was 
argued that the High Court by awarding a sum of Rs. 13,28,940/- 
(Rupees Thirteen Lakhs Twenty-Eight Thousand Nine Hundred and 
Forty) exceeded the originally prayed for compensation in the claim 
petition. Moreover, it was urged that the Award was not in accordance 
with the decision of this Court in Sarla Verma v Delhi Transport 
Corporation, (2009) 6 SCC 121. 
8.	
Lastly, learned counsel relied on the decisions rendered in New 
India Assurance Co. Ltd. v C M Jaya, (2002) 2 SCC 278 to state 
that compensation could not exceed the limits of the insurance 
policy and on Dhondubai v Hanmantappa Bandappa Gandigude 
Since Deceased Through His LRs & Ors., Civil Appeals 
No.5459-5460/2023, to argue that liability cannot be fastened on 
the insurance company, when the deceased was travelling in an 
uninsured trailer.
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
9.	
Heard the learned counsel for the appellant and perused the material/
evidence on record. We have given serious consideration to the 
146
Supreme Court Reports
issue as it raises a mixed question of fact and law where both have 
to be harmoniously balanced. 
10.	 In the present case, the admitted fact is that the incident occurred 
while a tractor which was insured with the Appellant was attached 
to a trailer and on the trailer a person was present who due to an 
unfortunate accident, fell off the trailer which was being pulled by/
driven by/attached to the tractor, resulting in the death of such person.
11.	 Therefore, the undisputed position is that the trailer was being pulled 
by/attached to the tractor and then the trailer on which the deceased 
was present, turned turtle/upturned, resulting in his death. From the 
above, it is clear that the tractor which was insured was the reason 
for the accident. It is not the case that only because of some fault on 
the part of the trailer stand-alone, the accident happened. To explain, 
we may give an example: that had the trailer been stationary at a 
place and due to some reason, it overturned or a mishap happened, 
then without the trailer being specifically insured the Appellant would 
not be liable to pay, but here the main cause of the accident was 
the tractor which was pulling/driving/moving the trailer and in such 
sequence of events, the trailer upturned. Thus, the accident was 
caused by the tractor, as during the course of being driven/pulled 
by the tractor, the accident occurred. 
12.	 Thus, the liability of the tractor/its insurer extended to the accident 
caused by the tractor resulting in the death of the deceased, through 
the trailer. This being the position in the present case, the principles 
emanating from the decisions where the Courts have held that the 
trailer has to be separately registered with the insurance company 
to make it liable, would not be applicable. To that extent, the facts 
in the present case are clearly distinguishable from the ones cited 
by learned counsel for the appellant. The legislation i.e., the MV Act, 
being beneficial and welfare-oriented in nature [Ningamma v United 
India Insurance Co. Ltd., (2009) 13 SCC 710; K Ramya v National 
Insurance Co. Ltd., 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1338, and; Shivaleela v 
Divisional Manager, United India Insurance Co. Ltd., 2025 SCC 
OnLine SC 563] and ultimately the root cause of the accident being 
the tractor, which was insured, this crucial fact cannot be lost sight of. 
For further clarification, we might illustrate: if an insured vehicle hits 
another vehicle which in turn hits a third vehicle, then for the entire 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
147
The Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance Company Limited v. 
Smt. Honnamma & Ors.
chain of accidents, the liability would pass on to the vehicle which 
was the root cause of the accident because it is the result of the 
action in the same chain of events which cannot be segregated or 
compartmentalized. Moreover, this Court is duty-bound to be mindful 
of the ground realities of our nation and cannot let practicality be 
overshadowed by technicality. 
13.	 In Dhondubai (supra), the Court stated:
‘5. In a matter of the present nature, the law is well 
settled that when a tractor and trailer are involved, 
both the tractor as well as the trailer are required to be 
insured. Therefore, in a normal circumstance, when 
the appellant/claimant was travelling in the trailer which 
was not insured, the liability on the Insurance Company 
cannot be fastened and to that extent the High Court 
was justified.’
(emphasis supplied)
14.	 To our mind, the learned Judges in Dhondubhai (supra) did not 
lay down an absolute principle of law, but taking note of Oriental 
Insurance Co. Limited v Brij Mohan, (2007) 7 SCC 56, it was amount 
awarded by the High Court as compensation with the accrued interest 
and recover the same from the owner of the vehicle.’ A decision by 
a Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in United India 
Insurance Co. Ltd., Kadapa District v Koduru Bhagyamma, 2007 
SCC OnLine AP 830 is relevant:
‘1. This case has come before this Court on a reference 
made by a learned Single Judge of this Court as it 
was contended before the learned Single Judge by the 
appellant that as the trailer in which the deceased was 
travelling was not insured, although it was attached 
to the tractor which was insured, therefore no liability 
could be fastened upon the insurer.
xxx
13. Now on analysis of these judgments and the provisions 
of law which have been quoted above, we feel that 
the law has been correctly appreciated by a learned 
148
Supreme Court Reports
Single Judge of this Court in Gunti Devaiah v. Vaka 
Peddi Reddy (supra) and the reasons given by him 
are sufficient to hold that under the Motor Vehicles 
Act no separate insurance is contemplated for a trailer 
and when the trailer is attached to the tractor which 
is insured, it becomes the part of the tractor. We 
reproduce the Para 26 of the said judgment as under:
“The word “vehicle” mentioned in Section 147 
is co-relatable to the word motor vehicles, 
which is stipulated in Section 146. Therefore, 
the expression vehicle wherever appearing 
in Chapter X(XI) has to be only read as 
motor vehicle. The principle of claim for 
compensation in accidents arising out of the 
use of the motor vehicle is based on tortuous 
liability and the negligence of the driver 
of the motor vehicle is a sine quo non for 
maintaining a claim under the provisions 
of the Act. Inasmuch as the trailer by itself 
cannot be driven and it has to be carried or 
towed with a motor vehicle namely a tractor 
or a like self-propelled vehicles. Therefore, 
the question of driving the trailer in a rash 
and negligent manner would not arise. It is 
only the prime mover or the motor vehicle 
which controls movement of the tractor and 
in case of the negligence driving of the trailer 
or the motor vehicle, the owner of the vehicle 
and its insurer alone will be made liable for 
payment of compensation. But, since the 
trailer is attached can it be said that trailer 
should also be independently insured so as 
to avoid the liability of compensation in case 
of rash and negligent driving by the driver. 
That contingency would not arise, as it is 
only a vehicle and not a motor vehicle. It may 
be for tax purposes, it is treated as a goods 
vehicle. But, under the provisions of the 
Motor Vehicles Act, no separate insurance 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
149
The Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance Company Limited v. 
Smt. Honnamma & Ors.
is contemplated. When the trailer is attached 
to the tractor it becomes a tractor-trailer. 
There is no provision requiring the trailer 
to be separately insured to cover the third 
party risk. The reasons are obvious that 
it cannot be driven by the driver as in the 
case of motor vehicles or tractors. Thus, a 
separate distinction has been drawn between 
the motor vehicle and a vehicle i.e., visible 
in all the definitions and more especially 
in Chapter XI. The same situation also 
persists in Chapter X in case of no fault 
liability wherein it has been stated that 
whether a death or a permanent disability 
of any person has been resulted from an 
accident arising out of the use of a motor 
vehicle or motor vehicles and there is no 
reference to  vehicle as such. This aspect 
was never considered in any of the decisions 
relied on by the learned Standing Counsel 
for the Insurance Company and also for 
other side.”’
(underlined in original; emphasis supplied by 
us through the bold highlight)
15.	 Insofar as the Appellant’s reliance on C M Jaya (supra) is concerned, 
we may first set out Section 147 of the MV Act, as it currently stands:
‘147. Requirement of policies and limits of liability.—(1) 
In order to comply with the requirements of this Chapter, 
a policy of insurance must be a policy which—
(a) is issued by a person who is an authorised insurer; and
(b) insures the person or classes of persons specified in 
the policy to the extent specified in sub-section (2)—
(i) against any liability which may be incurred by 
him in respect of the death of or bodily injury to 
any person including owner of the goods or his 
authorised representative carried in the motor 
150
Supreme Court Reports
vehicle or damage to any property of a third 
party caused by or arising out of the use of the 
motor vehicle in a public place;
(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to 
any passenger of a transport vehicle, except 
gratuitous passengers of a goods vehicle, 
caused by or arising out of the use of the motor 
vehicle in a public place.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
clarified that the death of or bodily injury to any person or 
damage to any property of a third party shall be deemed 
to have been caused by or to have arisen out of, the 
use of a vehicle in a public place, notwithstanding that 
the person who is dead or injured or the property which 
is damaged was not in a public place at the time of the 
accident, if the act or omission which led to the accident 
occurred in a public place.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained under any other law 
for the time being in force, for the purposes of third party 
insurance related to either death of a person or grievous 
hurt to a person, the Central Government shall prescribe 
a base premium and the liability of an insurer in relation to 
such premium for an insurance policy under sub-section 
(1) in consultation with the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority.
(3) A policy shall be of no effect for the purposes of this 
Chapter unless and until there is issued by the insurer 
in favour of the person by whom the policy is effected, 
a certificate of insurance in the prescribed form and 
containing the prescribed particulars of any condition 
subject to which the policy is issued and of any other 
prescribed matters; and different forms, particulars and 
matters may be prescribed in different cases.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a policy 
of Insurance issued before the commencement of the Motor 
Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 shall be continued on 
the existing terms under the contract and the provisions 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
151
The Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance Company Limited v. 
Smt. Honnamma & Ors.
of this Act shall apply as if this Act had not been amended 
by the said Act.
(5) Where a cover note issued by the insurer under the 
provisions of this Chapter or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder is not followed by a policy of insurance within 
the specified time, the insurer shall, within seven days of 
the expiry of the period of the validity of the cover note, 
notify the fact to the registering authority or to such other 
authority as the State Government may prescribe.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, an insurer issuing a policy of 
insurance under this section shall be liable to indemnify 
the person or classes of persons specified in the policy in 
respect of any liability which the policy purports to cover 
in the case of that person or those classes of persons.’
16.	 The provision supra is identical to Section 95 of the Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1939, which was looked at in C M Jaya (supra), wherein a 
5-Judge Bench harmonised the decisions of the 3-Judge Benches 
in New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v Shantibai, (1995) 2 SCC 539 
and Amrit Lal Sood v Kaushalya Thapar, (1998) 3 SCC 744 on the 
extent of liability that could be fastened on the insurer. The Bench 
of 5 learned Judges held:
‘8. Thus, a careful reading of these decisions clearly shows 
that the liability of the insurer is limited, as indicated 
in Section 95 of the Act, but it is open to the insured 
to make payment of additional higher premium and 
get higher risk covered in respect of third party also. 
But in the absence of any such clause in the insurance 
policy the liability of the insurer cannot be unlimited 
in respect of third party and it is limited only to the 
statutory liability. This view has been consistently 
taken in the other decisions of this Court.
9. In Shanti Bai case [(1995) 2 SCC 539] a Bench of 
three learned Judges of this Court, following the case of 
Jugal Kishore [(1988) 1 SCC 626: 1988 SCC (Cri) 222] 
has held that:
152
Supreme Court Reports
(i) a comprehensive policy which has been 
issued on the basis of the estimated value 
of the vehicle does not automatically result 
in covering the liability with regard to third-
party risk for an amount higher than the 
statutory limit,
(ii) that even though it is not permissible 
to use a vehicle unless it is covered at 
least under an “Act only” policy, it is not 
obligatory for the owner of a vehicle to get 
it comprehensively insured, and
(iii) that the limit of liability with regard to 
third-party risk does not become unlimited 
or higher than the statutory liability in the 
absence of specific agreement to make the 
insurer’s liability unlimited or higher than 
the statutory liability.
10. On a careful reading and analysis of the decision in 
Amrit Lal Sood [(1998) 3 SCC 744] it is clear that the 
view taken by the Court is no different. In this decision 
also, the case of Jugal Kishore [(1988) 1 SCC 626: 1988 
SCC (Cri) 222] is referred to. It is held:
(i) that the liability of the insurer depends on 
the terms of the contract between the insured 
and the insurer contained in the policy;
(ii) there is no prohibition for an insured 
from entering into a contract of insurance 
covering a risk wider than the minimum 
requirement of the statute whereby risk 
to the gratuitous passenger could also be 
covered; and
(iii) in such cases where the policy is not 
merely statutory policy, the terms of the 
policy have to be considered to determine 
the liability of the insurer.
Hence, the Court after noticing the relevant clauses 
in the policy, on facts found that under Section II(1)
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
153
The Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance Company Limited v. 
Smt. Honnamma & Ors.
(a) of the policy, the insurer has agreed to indemnify 
the insured against all sums which the insured shall 
become legally liable to pay in respect of death of or 
bodily injury to “any person”. The expression “any 
person” would undoubtedly include an occupant of 
the car who is gratuitously travelling in it. Further, 
referring to the case of Pushpabai Purshottam Udeshi 
[(1977) 2 SCC 745] it was observed that the said decision 
was based upon the relevant clause in the insurance 
policy in that case which restricted the legal liability of the 
insurer to the statutory requirement under Section 95 of 
the Act. As such, that decision had no bearing on Amrit 
Lal Sood case [(1998) 3 SCC 744] as the terms of the 
policy were wide enough to cover a gratuitous occupant 
of the vehicle. Thus, it is clear that the specific clause in 
the policy being wider, covering higher risk, made all the 
difference in Amrit Lal Sood case [(1998) 3 SCC 744] as 
to unlimited or higher liability. The Court decided that case 
in the light of the specific clause contained in the policy. 
The said decision cannot be read as laying down that even 
though the liability of the Insurance Company is limited to 
the statutory requirement, an unlimited or higher liability 
can be imposed on it. The liability could be statutory or 
contractual. A statutory liability cannot be more than 
what is required under the statute itself. However, 
there is nothing in Section 95 of the Act prohibiting 
the parties from contracting to create unlimited or 
higher liability to cover wider risk. In such an event, 
the insurer is bound by the terms of the contract as 
specified in the policy in regard to unlimited or higher 
liability as the case may be. In the absence of such a 
term or clause in the policy, pursuant to the contract 
of insurance, a limited statutory liability cannot be 
expanded to make it unlimited or higher. If it is so done, 
it amounts to rewriting the statute or the contract of 
insurance which is not permissible.
xxx
14. In the premise, we hold that the view expressed by the 
Bench of three learned Judges in the case of Shanti Bai 
[(1995) 2 SCC 539] is correct and answer the question set 
154
Supreme Court Reports
out in the order of reference in the beginning as under: In the 
case of the Insurance Company not taking any higher 
liability by accepting a higher premium for payment 
of compensation to a third party, the insurer would be 
liable to the extent limited under Section 95(2) of the 
Act and would not be liable to pay the entire amount.’
(emphasis supplied)
17.	 In this light, let us examine the insurance policy, holistically. Relevant 
clauses read as under:
‘The Policy does not cover:
a) Use for Racing, Pace Making, Reliability trails or Speed 
Testing
b) Use for the Carriage of passengers for hire or reward.
c) Use whilst drawing a greater number of trailers in 
all than is permitted under law.
xxx
LIMITS OF LIABILITY:
Under Section 11-1 (i) of the Policy - Death of or bodily 
injury - Such amount as is necessary to meet the 
requirements of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
xxx
B - LIABILITY
3. Trailers (IMT 48) 0.001
xxx
Legal Liability:
9. To Coolies (IMT 39) 3 0.00 2’
(emphasis supplied)
1.	
0.00 refers to the ‘Premium in Rs’.
2.	
Ibid.
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
155
The Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance Company Limited v. 
Smt. Honnamma & Ors.
18.	 What emerges is that the Appellant ought not to be saddled with 
payment of compensation exceeding what the insurance policy 
provides for or the limit, if any, set under any law for the time being 
in force, whichever be the higher amount of the two, in the underlying 
factual scenario. The amount exclusively payable by the Appellant, 
however, shall in no case be less than Rs.9,50,000/- (Rupees Nine 
Lakhs Fifty Thousand). 
19.	 For the reasons aforesaid, we do not find any infirmity in the Impugned 
Order, either with regard to the quantum of compensation awarded or 
fixation of liability on the insurer-Appellant for the accident. The same 
shall be paid within two months from today after adjusting whatever 
has been paid earlier, in terms of Order dated 06.02.2023 passed 
in the present case. However, liberty is granted to the Appellant to 
recover the differential amount (if any), in terms of Paragraph 18 
supra i.e., total compensation awarded less the maximum amount 
payable, contractually or as per law (whichever be the higher amount), 
by the Appellant, from the Respondent No.4-owner.
20.	 Accordingly, subject to the above observations and directions, the 
appeal is dismissed. No order as to costs.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain