[2025] 3 S.C.R. 317 : 2025 INSC 318
Suresh 
v. 
State Rep. By Inspector of Police
(Criminal Appeal No. 540 of 2013)
04 March 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia* and Ahsanuddin Amanullah, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court was correct to uphold the conviction and 
life imprisonment granted by the Trial Court.
Headnotes†
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 — Whether High Court 
correctly appreciated the facts and upheld the conviction of 
the accused — Correctness:
Held: While convicting, the Trial Court mainly relied upon the 
evidence given by parents of the deceased and the dying 
declaration, which was recorded by the Judicial Magistrate — Dying 
declaration is an important piece of evidence and a conviction 
can be made by relying solely on a dying declaration alone as 
it holds immense importance in criminal law – However, such 
reliance should be placed after ascertaining the quality of the dying 
declaration and considering the entire facts of a given case — The 
deceased had given two statements which are totally different from 
her subsequent statement made before the Judicial Magistrate, 
which casts serious doubts on the veracity of the deceased’s 
subsequent statement, where the deceased had blamed the 
accused for the incident — No other evidence corroborates the 
deceased’s statement that the appellant had poured kerosene on 
her and then set her on fire — The doctor, who had examined the 
deceased immediately after the incident, denied the presence of 
the smell of kerosene in the body of the deceased when she was 
brought to the hospital — Reliance of prosecution on Observation 
Mahazar is not correct, which is itself doubtful as the seizure 
witness to the said Mahazar has turned hostile and there had been 
an inordinate delay in sending the Mahazar to Court — Where 
the deceased has been changing her stance and has completely 
* Author
318
turned around her statements, such a dying declaration cannot 
become the sole basis for the conviction in the absence of any 
other corroborative evidence — Total reliance on subsequent dying 
declaration would be misplaced – Thus, the accused deserves to 
be given the benefit of doubt, therefore acquitted. [Paras 11-17]
Case Law Cited
Uttam v. State of Maharashtra [2022] 5 SCR 863 : (2022) 8 SCC 
576 – relied upon.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
List of Keywords
Dying declaration not the sole basis for conviction; Failure of justice.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
540 of 2013
From the Judgment and Order dated 28.02.2012 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras in Crl.A. (MD) No. 178 of 2011
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Abhimanyu Singh, Amicus Curiae (Assisted by: Deepak Raj, 
Aravindh S.).
Advs. for the Respondent:
V. Krishnamurthy, A.A.G., Sabarish Subramanian, Vishnu 
Unnikrishnan, Ms. Azka Sheikh, Ms. Jahnavi Taneja, Danish Saifi.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sudhanshu Dhulia, J.
1.	
The appellant before us has challenged the order dated 28.02.2012 
by which the High Court of Madras has upheld the appellant’s 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
319
Suresh v. State Rep. By Inspector of Police
conviction and life sentence for an offence under Section 302 of the 
Indian Penal Code (‘IPC’). 
2.	
The brief case of the prosecution is that on 12.09.2008 at around 
6 pm, the appellant caused the death of his wife (‘deceased’) by 
pouring kerosene on her body and setting her on fire, which ultimately 
resulted in her death after a period of approximately three weeks in a 
hospital. The appellant used to reside in his house at Narayanachetti 
Street, Tuticorin with his wife and a 2 ½ year old son. The Mother-
in-law (PW-1) and Father-in-law (PW-2) of the appellant used to 
reside in the street next to the appellant’s street. On the fateful day 
i.e., 12.09.2008 when the child of the deceased was crying, the 
deceased called her mother (PW-1) to pacify the child and the child 
was taken away by her mother (PW-1) to her house which was in 
the neighbourhood. Meanwhile, PW-1 and PW-2 were informed by 
a neighbourhood child that their daughter Sumathi (deceased) had 
caught fire. She was then immediately taken to a nearby hospital, 
and then to another hospital (American Hospital) and eventually 
admitted in a Government Hospital at Thoothukudi. 
3.	
At around 9:30 pm, when police received the information, PW-9 (Head 
Constable) reached the hospital and recorded the statement of the 
deceased. In her statement to PW-9, the deceased stated that she 
caught fire while working in the kitchen. She also states that at the time 
of the incident, the appellant was sleeping and when she screamed, 
the appellant woke up and tried to put off the fire. On the basis of this 
statement, a general diary entry was made by police on 12.09.2008.
4.	
Thereafter, on 15.09.2008, a case for accidental fire was registered. 
On the same day, PW-15 (Sub-Inspector) visited the scene of the 
occurrence and seized a kerosene can and matchstick. On this day, 
police recorded another statement of the deceased where she stated 
that her husband had set her on fire by pouring kerosene and she 
did not state so in her earlier statement as her husband was present 
while PW-9 recorded her statement on 12.09.2008. On 15.09.2008, 
the accidental fire case was converted to a case under section 307 of 
IPC against the appellant. Finally, upon the death of the deceased on 
02.10.2008, section 307 of IPC was modified to section 302 of IPC.
5.	
Before the death of the deceased, on 18.09.2008, a Judicial Magistrate 
recorded a statement of the deceased and this statement was used 
by the prosecution as the dying declaration. In this statement, the 
320
deceased stated before the Judicial Magistrate (PW-12) that it was 
the appellant who had poured kerosene on her and set her on fire 
on 12.09.2008.
6.	
The Trial Court treated this statement given to PW-12 as the dying 
declaration and convicted the appellant under section 302 of IPC. 
In appeal before the High Court, the conviction and sentence of life 
imprisonment, imposed by the Trial Court, have been affirmed by 
the impugned order dated 28.02.2012. Aggrieved by the same, the 
appellant is here before us.
7.	
We have heard both sides and perused the material before us.
8.	
Before coming to the issue of dying declaration, we would like to go 
through the evidence of other witnesses who were there before the 
Trial Court. There were as many as 17 witnesses from the side of 
the prosecution. PW-1 and PW-2, who are the mother and father of 
the deceased respectively, had both deposed that when they reached 
the house of the deceased, they found the deceased was burnt and 
also deposed that PW-3 (neighbour) had already reached there and 
tried to douse the fire. PW-1 and PW-2 also deposed that they were 
the ones who had taken the deceased to the hospital. 
9.	
PW-1 and PW-2 also tried to suggest that the appellant had set the 
deceased on fire and neither did he make any attempt to douse the 
fire nor did he accompany them when they took the deceased to the 
hospital. On the other hand, it is to be noted that PW-3 and PW-4 
deposed that they were the first to reach the deceased’s house and 
they deposed that the appellant was the one who informed PW-1 
and PW-2 about the incident. PW-3 also deposed that she and her 
father (PW-4), as well as, the appellant tried to extinguish the fire. 
However, these two prosecution witnesses i.e. PW-3 and PW-4 were 
declared hostile. Moreover, PW-13 (doctor) had deposed that when 
the deceased was brought to the hospital, the appellant was with the 
deceased. Here, it is to be noted that the appellant suffers from 40% 
physical disability resulting from a polio attack. Also, the version that 
the appellant had not made any attempt to take the deceased to the 
hospital is not only in contradiction with the deposition of PW-13 but 
would also be fatal for the prosecution case itself as the prosecution 
case mainly relies on the story that the deceased had made a false 
statement due to the presence of the appellant in the hospital, in 
other words, appellant was there in the hospital with the deceased 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
321
Suresh v. State Rep. By Inspector of Police
when her statement was recorded by the Police, immediately on the 
arrival of the deceased in the hospital.
10.	 PW-13 is the doctor who attended to the deceased when she 
was taken to the Government Hospital. PW-13 deposed that the 
deceased had told him that she caught fire while cooking. In his 
cross-examination, this witness admitted that there was no smell 
of kerosene oil emanating from her body. PW-11, the doctor who 
conducted the post-mortem, deposed that the deceased died due to 
burn injuries and complications therefrom. In the cross-examination, 
PW-11 deposed that there were no external injuries on the body of 
the deceased except the burn injuries. This rules out any possibility 
of an assault on the deceased before she had caught fire. 
11.	 While convicting the appellant under section 302 of IPC, the Trial 
Court mainly relied upon the evidence given by PW-1 and PW-2 and 
the dying declaration, which was recorded by the Judicial Magistrate 
(PW-12) on 18.09.2008. Thereafter, in appeal, without appreciating 
the facts of the case in their proper perspective, the High Court also 
mechanically upheld the conviction and life sentence of the appellant.
12.	 Now coming to the issue of the dying declaration. There is no doubt 
regarding the well-settled position of law that a dying declaration 
is an important piece of evidence and a conviction can be made 
by relying solely on a dying declaration alone as it holds immense 
importance in criminal law. However, such reliance should be placed 
after ascertaining the quality of the dying declaration and considering 
the entire facts of a given case. This Court in Uttam v. State of 
Maharashtra (2022) 8 SCC 576, with respect to inconsistent dying 
declarations, observed as follows:
“15. In cases involving multiple dying declarations made 
by the deceased, the question that arises for consideration 
is as to which of the said dying declarations ought to be 
believed by the court and what would be the guiding factors 
for arriving at a just and lawful conclusion. The problem 
becomes all the more knotty when the dying declarations 
made by the deceased are found to be contradictory. 
Faced with such a situation, the court would be expected 
to carefully scrutinise the evidence to find out as to which 
of the dying declarations can be corroborated by other 
material evidence produced by the prosecution.”
322
In other words, if a dying declaration is surrounded by doubt or there 
are inconsistent dying declarations by the deceased, then Courts must 
look for corroborative evidence to find out which dying declaration is 
to be believed. This will depend upon the facts of the case and Courts 
are required to act cautiously in such cases. The matter at hand is 
one such case. In the present case, the deceased had given two 
statements which are totally different from her subsequent statements 
including the statement made before PW-12 on 18.09.2008, which has 
been considered a dying declaration based on which the appellant 
has been convicted. The first statement was made to the doctor 
(PW-13) on the day of the incident itself where she told PW-13 that 
the incident occurred while she was cooking. On the same day, the 
second statement was made to the police constable (PW-9) where 
the deceased said the same thing i.e. she caught fire by accident 
while cooking in the kitchen.
13.	 Now, the variances in deceased’s statements cast serious doubts 
on the veracity of her subsequent statement of 18.09.2008 made 
before the Judicial Magistrate (PW-12) where the deceased had 
blamed the appellant for the incident. The deceased tried to explain 
her conduct by stating that she made false statements on the day 
of the incident as she could not tell the truth in the presence of her 
husband. It is very difficult to believe this version of the deceased 
because no other evidence corroborates the deceased’s statement 
that the appellant had poured kerosene on her and then set her on 
fire. Moreover, in his cross-examination, Judicial Magistrate (PW-
12) admitted that he did not question the deceased with regards to 
the details of her previous statements made before the police. The 
deceased did not say anything to the Judicial Magistrate regarding 
her previous statements of 12.09.2008 and 15.09.2008. In other 
words, the deceased did not tell the Magistrate that she lied in her 
statement of 12.09.2008. It is not a case of dowry harassment as 
all such possibilities were already ruled out during the investigation. 
When the Judicial Magistrate (PW-12) questioned the deceased 
about the reason for which appellant had set her on fire, as claimed 
by the deceased, the deceased answered as follows:
“I had beaten my son Rubiston. My husband had asked 
me why you are beating the child. My husband had abused 
me with filthy language. I told him that I am going to die. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
323
Suresh v. State Rep. By Inspector of Police
He said that why do you die and he himself had poured 
kerosene and burnt me”
This is also contradictory to the other evidence on record and here, 
the timeline of the events becomes important. From the deposition 
of PW-1, it comes out that PW-1 was called by the deceased 
around 2 pm and PW-1 went to deceased’s house and brought the 
deceased’s son to her house. The incident occurred in the evening 
at around 6 pm. As per the deceased’s dying declaration, she was 
beating her child to which the appellant raised objections and the 
matter escalated, leading to the alleged incident. All of this makes 
the dying declaration extremely doubtful.
14.	 As discussed above, in cases where the dying declaration is 
suspicious, it is not safe to convict an accused in the absence of 
corroborative evidence. In a case like the present one, where the 
deceased has been changing her stance and has completely turned 
around her statements, such a dying declaration cannot become the 
sole basis for the conviction in the absence of any other corroborative 
evidence. 
15.	 On this point, the prosecution would argue that Observation Mahazar 
prepared by PW-15 talks about the recovery of an empty kerosene 
can and match stick from the spot. PW-15 also mentioned in the 
Observation Mahazar that when he visited the deceased’s house 
on 15.09.2008, it was full of the smell of burnt kerosene. According 
to the prosecution, this Mahazar corroborates the dying declaration 
made by the deceased. However, the veracity of this Observation 
Mahazar is itself in doubt. Apart from the fact that there had been 
an inordinate delay in sending the Mahazar to Court, the witnesses 
(PW-5 and PW-6) to the seizure of the above articles had also been 
declared hostile. PW-5 and PW-6 deposed that the site was visited 
by PW-15 but they did not support that any articles with kerosene 
smell were seized from the place. 
16.	 Moreover, no other witnesses had deposed about seeing any empty 
kerosene can or match stick. Even PW-1 and PW-2, who reached 
the scene and hospitalised the deceased, had not deposed anything 
like that. On the contrary, PW-13 (doctor) had categorically stated 
in his evidence that there was no smell of kerosene in the body 
of the deceased when she was brought to the hospital. Normally, 
where the death is caused by burning through kerosene, the smell 
324
of kerosene would definitely remain for a few hours, however, the 
smell does weaken after some time. Since, in the present case, the 
deceased was immediately brought to the hospital barely within a 
few hours of the incident, if kerosene was involved then the smell of 
kerosene ought to have been there. Even the doctor (PW-13), who 
had examined the deceased immediately after the incident, states 
that there was no such smell.
17.	 There is also another aspect to the case. It has come on record that 
the relations between the two families i.e., the family of the accused 
and the family of the deceased, had soured. In 2006, barely two years 
before the incident, the appellant’s brother had filed a criminal case 
of assault against the appellant’s father-in-law (PW-2) and brother-
in-law. In that case, PW-2 and his son were convicted. Before the 
Trial Court as well as the High Court, the appellant had tried to 
unsuccessfully contend that the dying declaration of 18.09.2008 is 
an afterthought of the deceased and the deceased made such a 
statement upon being tutored by PW-1 and PW-2. We are not in a 
position to give any definitive view on this aspect but considering 
the other evidence on record, the possibility of what the appellant 
is suggesting, cannot be ruled out. Thus, in our considered opinion, 
inspite of a dying declaration here, for the reasons stated above, 
total reliance on it would be misplaced. Consequently, the appellant 
deserves to be given the benefit of doubt.
18.	 We accordingly allow this appeal and acquit the appellant by setting 
aside the order of the High Court dated 28.02.2012. The appellant 
shall be released from jail forthwith. 
19.	 Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Gaurav Upadhyay, Hony. Associate Editor 
(Verified by: Kanu Agrawal, Adv.)