[2025] 4 S.C.R. 608 : 2025 INSC 471
State of Karnataka 
v. 
Sri Channakeshava.H.D. & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1849 of 2025)
08 April 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia* and K. Vinod Chandran, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court erred in quashing the FIR against the 
respondent no.1-public servant under Section 13(1)(b) read with 
Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 in a case of 
Disproportionate Assets, on the ground that the Superintendent of 
Police (SP) failed to conduct a preliminary enquiry before passing 
the orders directing registration of FIR.
Headnotes†
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 – ss.13(1)(b), 13(2), 
17 – Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.482 – Corruption 
matters against the public servants – Preliminary enquiry, 
if mandatory:
Held: No – There is no provision for a preliminary enquiry u/ss.13 
or 17, PC Act – Second proviso to s. 17, PC Act does not speak 
of a preliminary enquiry – Though, in matters of corruption against 
the public servants a preliminary enquiry is desirable, but it is 
not mandatory – In a case where a superior officer, based on a 
detailed source report disclosing the commission of a cognizable 
offence, passes an order for registration of FIR, the requirement 
of preliminary enquiry can be relaxed – In the present case, the 
preliminary enquiry was not mandated as detailed information 
was already there before the SP in the form of the source report 
explaining the reasons for initiation of proceedings giving the 
details – Thus, the SP had passed the order directing registration 
of FIR against the respondent no.1 on the basis of material 
placed before him in the form of the source report – High Court 
ought not to have quashed the FIR – Impugned order set aside. 
[Paras 8, 15, 16]
* Author
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
609
State of Karnataka v. Sri Channakeshava.H.D. & Anr.
Case Law Cited
Lalita Kumari v. Government of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. [2013] 14 
SCR 713 : (2014) 2 SCC 1; P. Sirajuddin v. State of Madras 
[1970] 3 SCR 931 : (1970) 1 SCC 595; State of Karnataka v. T.N 
Sudhakar Reddy, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 382; CBI v. Thommandru 
Hannah Vijayalakshmi [2021] 13 SCR 364 : (2021) 18 SCC 
135 – referred to.
List of Acts
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Proviso to section 17 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988; 
Corruption cases; Quashing; Section 482 CrPC; Disproportionate 
assets; Public servants; Preliminary enquiry; Source report; 
Superintendent of Police (SP); Lalita Kumari judgment.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1849 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.04.2024 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bengaluru in WP No. 28052 of 2023
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Devadatt Kamat, Sr. Adv., Nishanth Patil, Ayush P Shah, Arijit Dey, 
Mehul Kumar Garg.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Ranjit Kumar, Sr. Adv., Kumar Parimal, Smarhar Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sudhanshu Dhulia, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The State of Karnataka has presently challenged the order dated 
25.04.2024 passed by the Karnataka High Court where the learned 
610
Single Judge has quashed the entire proceedings initiated by the 
State against respondent no.1 (Sri Channakeshava. H.D.) for offences 
under Section 13(1)(b) read with Section 13(2) of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988 (for short ‘PC Act’), in a case of Disproportionate 
Assets (or DA case as it is called).
3.	
In the year 1998, respondent no.1 was appointed as an Assistant 
Engineer in Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited. Later, 
he was promoted to the post of Executive Engineer in Bangalore 
Electricity Supply Corporation (for short ‘BESCOM’). 
4.	
According to the prosecution, the respondent no.1, while working 
as a public servant, had enriched himself illicitly and consequently, 
an FIR (No.54/2023) at P.S Karnataka Lokayukta, Bangalore Town 
(Bangalore) was registered on 04.12.2023 under Section 13(1)(b) read 
with 13(2) of the PC Act. Thereafter, the investigation commenced.
5.	
The respondent no.1 filed a Writ Petition before the High Court 
seeking quashing of above-mentioned FIR. The FIR was primarily 
challenged on the ground that there has been a violation of the 
second proviso to Section 17 of the PC Act which mandates that 
investigation cannot be done without the order of a police officer 
not below the rank of a Superintendent of Police (for short ‘SP’) in 
relation to the offence mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section 1 of 
Section 13. Section 17 of the PC Act reads as follows:
“17. Persons authorised to investigate.—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) 38, no police officer below the rank,—
(a) in the case of the Delhi Special Police Establishment, 
of an Inspector of Police;
(b) in the metropolitan areas of Bombay, Calcutta, Madras 
and Ahmedabad and in any other metropolitan area notified 
as such under sub-section (1) of Section 8 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)39, of an Assistant 
Commissioner of Police;
(c) elsewhere, of a Deputy Superintendent of Police or a 
police officer of equivalent rank,
shall investigate any offence punishable under this 
Act without the order of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
611
State of Karnataka v. Sri Channakeshava.H.D. & Anr.
Magistrate of the first class, as the case may be, or make 
any arrest therefor without a warrant:
Provided that if a police officer not below the rank of an 
Inspector of Police is authorised by the State Government 
in this behalf by general or special order, he may also 
investigate any such offence without the order of a 
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class, 
as the case may be, or make arrest therefor without a 
warrant:
Provided further that an offence referred to in clause (b) 
of sub-section (1) of Section 13 shall not be investigated 
without the order of a police officer not below the rank of 
a Superintendent of Police.”
(emphasis supplied)
6.	
The learned Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court was of the 
opinion that although before lodging of the FIR, orders did come from 
the Superintendent of Police (‘SP’) but the SP had not conducted any 
preliminary enquiry before passing his orders and therefore, there was 
no application of mind by the SP. In the opinion of the learned Judge 
of the High Court, this would affect the entire proceedings and thus, 
High Court vide impugned order dated 25.04.2024 quashed the FIR. 
7.	
This order of the High Court has been challenged by the State of 
Karnataka before this Court primarily on the ground that a preliminary 
enquiry visualized under the said proviso is desirable but not 
mandatory. Further, it has been argued on behalf of the State of 
Karnataka that, in the present case, SP had passed an order dated 
04.12.2023 under Section 17 of the PC Act and this order was passed 
on consideration of relevant materials inasmuch as it was passed 
on the basis of a source report dated 05.10.2023.
8.	
There is no provision for a preliminary enquiry under Section 13 or 
Section 17 of the PC Act. The second proviso to Section 17 of the 
PC Act does not speak of a preliminary enquiry. It was only in Lalita 
Kumari v. Government of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. (2014) 2 SCC 1 that 
this Court had held that before proceeding against a public servant 
in matters of corruption, it is desirable to have a preliminary enquiry. 
Much before Lalita Kumari (Supra), this Court in P. Sirajuddin v. 
State of Madras (1970) 1 SCC 595 had observed that “before a 
612
public servant, whatever be his status, is publicly charged with acts 
of dishonesty which amount to serious misdemeanour or misconduct 
of the type alleged in this case and a first information is lodged 
against him, there must be some suitable preliminary enquiry into 
the allegations by a responsible officer.” Relying on this judgement, 
Lalita Kumari (Supra) had put the corruption matters under the 
category of cases in which preliminary enquiry may be made before 
registration of FIR. The relevant portion of Lalita Kumari (Supra) 
reads as follows:
“117. In the context of offences relating to corruption, this 
Court in P. Sirajuddin [P. Sirajuddin v. State of Madras, 
(1970) 1 SCC 595 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 240] expressed the 
need for a preliminary inquiry before proceeding against 
public servants.
…..
Conclusion/Directions
120. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold:
…..
120.6. As to what type and in which cases preliminary 
inquiry is to be conducted will depend on the facts 
and circumstances of each case. The category of 
cases in which preliminary inquiry may be made 
are as under:
(a) Matrimonial disputes/family disputes
(b) Commercial offences
(c) Medical negligence cases
(d) Corruption cases
(e) Cases where there is abnormal delay/laches 
in initiating criminal prosecution, for example, over 
3 months’ delay in reporting the matter without 
satisfactorily explaining the reasons for delay.”
(Emphasis supplied)
The learned counsel for the State of Karnataka would, however, 
argue that once a detailed source report is there before the SP, 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
613
State of Karnataka v. Sri Channakeshava.H.D. & Anr.
explaining the reasons for initiation of proceedings and when details 
are given, a formal preliminary enquiry may not be necessary as all 
the relevant material is already there before the SP.
9.	
The source report was prepared by respondent no.2-Deputy 
Superintendent of Police (DSP) and the same was submitted to the 
SP. The source report dated 05.10.2023 reads as follows: 
“To 
The Superintendent of Police-01 
Karnataka Lokayukta 
Bangalore City Division 
Bangalore
Sir
Sub: Submission of Source Report in respect of Sri 
Channakeshava H.D. Executive Engineer, Karnataka 
Electricity Supply Corporation Limited, presently working 
at BESCOM, Jayanagar Division, Banashankari I stage, 
Bangalore for acquisition of wealth disproportionate to his 
known source of income-Reg: 
With reference to the subject cited above, it is learnt as 
per the basic information secured that Sri Channakeshava 
H.D. Executive Engineer, Karnataka Electricity Supply 
Corporation Limited, presently working at BESCOM, 
Jayanagar Division, Banashankari I stage, Bangalore has 
acquired properties disproportionate to his income.
……. 
Sri Channakeshava joined the services of Karnataka 
Electricity Supply Corporation Limited, Munirabad on 
11-11-1998 as Assistant Engineer and then promoted as 
Executive Engineer in BESCOM, Koramangala division and 
thereafter worked in Hebbal Division and at present he is 
working as Executive Engineer (V) in Jayanagar Division. 
SOURCE OF CORRUPTION
There is information that during his Government tenure of 
service he has acquired illegal properties excessively in 
the names of third parties (benami) and also in the names 
of his family members.’
614
Then after giving details of the assets of the officer, source report 
concludes as follows: 
“As stated above, it is prime facie found that Sri 
Channakeshava H.D. has acquired properties 
disproportionate to his known source of income from the 
check period i.e., from the date of joining in Government 
service, from 11-11-1998 till 30-09-2023 to the tune of 
Rs. 6,64,67,000/- which works out to 92.54%. It is also 
learnt that the above S.G.O. might be possessing some 
more irregular/disproportionate properties elsewhere in 
Bangalore City and other places either in his name or in the 
names of third parties ( benami ). If search is made in his 
own house at Bangalore and other houses at Srirampura 
Main road, Amruthahalli, Jakkur, Father-in-law’s house 
at Nagawara, the place of work of the S.G.O., and the 
residence of his sister, there are possibilities of finding 
some more properties both movable and immovable, 
gold, silver articles, cash and bank deposits in excess 
disproportionate to his known source of income. Hence 
it is requested to take suitable legal action against the 
above-mentioned Government Servant by a registering 
a case under section section 13(l)(b) read with section 
13(2) of the PC Act 1988.”
10.	 According to this source report, it was prima facie found that 
respondent no.1 had acquired assets disproportionate to his 
known sources of income during the check period i.e. 11.11.1998 
to 30.09.2023, to the tune of Rs.6,64,67,000. Based on this source 
report, which is nothing but a kind of preliminary enquiry, an order 
was passed by the SP directing the registration of an FIR against 
respondent no.1.
11.	 Mr. Devadatt Kamat, senior advocate appearing for the appellant 
would rely upon the judgment of this Court in State of Karnataka 
v. T.N Sudhakar Reddy 2025 SCC OnLine SC 382 to contend that 
an enquiry before registration of FIR under PC Act is not mandatory. 
After considering the law as laid down in Lalita Kumari (Supra), 
this Court in T.N Sudhakar Reddy (Supra) observed as follows:
“19. … The necessity of a preliminary inquiry depends 
on the specific facts and circumstances of each case. 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
615
State of Karnataka v. Sri Channakeshava.H.D. & Anr.
For instance, corruption cases fall into a category where 
a preliminary inquiry ‘may be made’.
20. The use of the term ‘may be made’ as noted in Lalita 
Kumari (supra) underscores that conducting such an inquiry 
is discretionary in nature and not a mandatory obligation.
21. Following the rationale of Lalita Kumari (supra), this 
Court in Managipet (supra) held that while the decision 
in Lalita Kumari (supra) noted that a preliminary inquiry 
was desirable in cases of alleged corruption, this does 
not vest a right in the accused to demand a preliminary 
inquiry. Whether the preliminary inquiry is required to be 
conducted or not will depend on the peculiar facts and 
circumstances of each case, and it cannot be said to be 
a mandatory requirement, in the absence of which, an FIR 
cannot be registered against the accused in corruption-
related matters.”
(Emphasis supplied)
Further, in the said case, this Court held that:
“51. In view of the above discussion, we conclude that:
a….. 
b. The preliminary inquiry is not mandatory in every case 
under the PC Act. If a superior officer is in seisin of a 
source information report which is both detailed and well-
reasoned and such that any reasonable person would be 
of the view that it prima facie discloses the commission 
of a cognizable offence, the preliminary inquiry may be 
avoided.
(Emphasis Supplied)
12.	 To sum up, this Court has held that in matters of corruption a 
preliminary enquiry although desirable, but is not mandatory. In a 
case where a superior officer, based on a detailed source report 
disclosing the commission of a cognizable offence, passes an order 
for registration of FIR, the requirement of preliminary enquiry can 
be relaxed.
616
13.	 All the same, Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned senior advocate for respondent 
no.1, would argue that respondent no.1 was never given a chance to 
explain his position before the registration of FIR. He would, further, 
argue that FIR has been used as an instrument to harass the public 
servant and this is a case where no prior notice or hearing was given 
to the officer (respondent no.1), which could have taken place if a 
preliminary enquiry had been held. 
14.	 Mr. Devadatt Kamat, senior counsel, has relied upon a recent Three-
Judge Bench decision of this Court in CBI v. Thommandru Hannah 
Vijayalakshmi (2021) 18 SCC 135 where it was specifically stated 
that an accused public servant does not have any right to explain 
the alleged disproportionate assets before filing of an FIR. We are 
also of the opinion that this is the correct legal position as there is 
no inherent right of a public servant to be heard at this stage. 
15.	 In view of the above, it is clear that preliminary enquiry was not 
mandated in the present case, considering that detailed information 
was already there before the SP in the form of the source report 
referred above. We have also gone through the order passed by 
the SP, directing registration of FIR against respondent no.1, which 
reflects that the SP had passed that order on the basis of material 
placed before him in the form of the source report. 
16.	 Considering all the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the 
considered opinion that the High Court ought not to have quashed 
the FIR in the present case. Accordingly, we allow this appeal and 
impugned order dated 25.04.2024 is hereby set aside.
17.	 Interim order(s), if any, stand(s) vacated.
18.	 Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey