[2025] 3 S.C.R. 289 : 2025 INSC 182
Naushey Ali & Ors.
v.
State of U.P. & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 660 of 2025)
11 February 2025
[K.V. Viswanathan* and S.V.N. Bhatti, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the present case is a fit case where proceedings could be 
quashed, particularly when Section 307, IPC inter alia was invoked 
and there was a settlement between the parties.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.482 – Penal Code, 
1860 – s.307 – Complaint was filed against the appellants 
under various sections including s.307, IPC – However, parties 
later settled the dispute – High Court declined to quash the 
proceedings holding that a case involving allegation of offence 
u/s.307, IPC cannot be compounded – Interference with:
Held: Impugned order set aside – High Court mixed up the 
concepts of compounding and powers of quashing – Further, 
mere mention of s.307 IPC in the FIR or the charge-sheet does 
not preclude the Court from quashing the proceedings if there is 
a settlement – Court can examine as to whether incorporation of 
s.307, IPC is there for the sake of it or whether there is evidence 
to back it going by the nature of injuries sustained; as to whether 
the injuries are inflicted on the vital/delicate parts of the body 
and the nature of weapon used – In the present case, admittedly, 
there is a settlement between the parties – Furthermore, on facts, 
considering the injury, the nature of the weapon used and the 
overt act attributed to the appellants, no offence u/s.307, IPC was 
made out either on a stand-alone basis or with the aid of s.149 – 
As a matter of fact, the police had actually closed the case in its 
final report however, it was the trial Court which refused to accept 
the same and summoned the appellants – Present is a fit case 
where pending proceedings should be quashed – Proceedings 
quashed. [Paras 12, 14, 19, 23, 24]
* Author
290
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.482 – Quashing  
vis-à-vis compounding:
Held: Compounding and quashing are conceptually different – 
However, merely because there is a settlement, for certain 
categories of offences proceedings will not be quashed because 
the crimes that have harmful effects on the public and consist of 
wrongdoing that seriously endangers and threatens the well-being 
of the society cannot be quashed, only because the accused and 
the victim have amicably settled the matter – In the instant case, 
the nature of the weapon and the nature of the injury (fracture 
of the head of distal phalanx of left ring finger), the offence 
alleged, on facts, does not fall in that category of cases where the 
court should deny relief in the event of a settlement – On facts, 
considering all the circumstances, the crime is not such which 
has a harmful effect on the public and has the effect of seriously 
threatening the well-being of the society – Proceeding with the 
trial, when parties have amicably resolved the dispute is futile 
and would be a grave abuse of process – Thus, settlement ought 
to be given effect to by quashing the proceedings – Proceedings 
quashed. [Para 20]
Case Law Cited
Gian Singh v. State of Punjab and Another [2012] 8 SCR 753 : 
(2012) 10 SCC 303; State of Madhya Pradesh v. Laxmi Narayan 
and Others [2019] 2 SCR 864 : (2019) 5 SCC 688; Narinder Singh 
and Others v. State of Punjab and Another [2014] 4 SCR 1012 : 
(2014) 6 SCC 466; Ramgopal v. State of M.P. [2021] 6 SCR 249 : 
(2022) 14 SCC 531 – relied on.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Section 307 
of Penal Code, 1860; Quashment of Proceedings; Quashing; 
Settlement; Compromise; Compounding of offence; Common 
Object; General Allegation; Role not specific; Overt Act; Dispute 
settled; Harmful effect on the public; Threatening the well-being 
of the society; Abuse of process; Nature of the weapon; Nature 
of the injury.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
291
Naushey Ali & Ors. v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal  
No. 660 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 19.01.2023 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in A482 No. 1315 of 2023
Appearances for Parties
Anupam Mishra, Jenis V Francis, Advs. for the Appellants. 
Ms. Garima Prashad, Sr. A.A.G., Sudeep Kumar, Ms. Manisha, 
Ms. Rupali, Harikumar V., Advs. for the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeal calls in question the correctness of the order 
dated 19.01.2023 in Application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. No. 1315 
of 2023 on the file of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. 
By the said order, the High Court, by holding that a case involving 
allegation of Commission of offence under Section 307 of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860 (for short ‘IPC’) cannot be compounded, dismissed 
the application under Section 482 Cr.P.C., seeking quashment of 
proceedings. Five of the eight appellants before the High Court – 
Naushey Ali, Khushboo Ali, Khursheed, Raza Ali and Nanhe – are 
before this Court in Appeal. The other three have passed away. 
3.	
The facts of the case lie in a very narrow compass. 
i)	
The appellants and respondent No.2 Mahmood S/o late Abdul 
Lateef are residents of the same village - Barwara Khas, District 
Moradabad, U.P. 
ii)	
With respect to an occurrence on 11.08.1991, it was the 
appellants’ party which first lodged Case Crime No. 248/91 on 
the said day itself against the respondent No.2, his father and 
others for offences punishable under Sections 147, 148, 149, 
307, 325, 506, 323 and 504 of IPC. 
292
iii)	
On 27.08.1991, Case Crime No. 248-A/91 was registered by 
Abdul Lateef, on behalf of respondent No.2, in FIR No. 141 
of 1991. The sections, violations of which were alleged were, 
147, 148, 149, 307, 325, 506, 323 and 504 IPC. This FIR was 
registered against all eight persons, including the appellants. 
iv)	
The gravamen of the allegation was that the appellants’ party 
wanted to pass the irrigation water through the field of the 
complainant by forcibly digging the land. When it was resisted 
by the complainant party, the appellants’ party abused them in 
filthy language and assaulted Mahmood S/o Abdul Lateef with 
lathi and iron bars. When Mahmood ran to save his life, Abdul 
Waris (since deceased) opened fire from his rifle. 
v)	
According to the complainant, on hearing the sound, Munnan S/o 
Mangu and Vilayat S/o Inayat came and saved them. Thereafter, 
they reached the Police Station to lodge a report, when they 
found that the appellants’ party was already present at the Police 
Station. A complaint was lodged by Mahmood but the thumb 
impression on his behalf was put by his father Abdul Lateef.
vi)	
On 07.09.1991, after investigation, the police filed a final report 
No. 50/91 stating that the complaint was a false complaint. It 
was recorded that during the course of investigation, from the 
statements of witnesses, it was found that the case has been 
falsely registered by the complainant as a counter blast to FIR 
No. 248/91 lodged by the appellants’ party. 
vii)	 However, on 05.09.1992, the police report was rejected by 
the VIth Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Moradabad, who 
summoned the appellants and the three others - Abdul Waris, 
Rasheed and Maseeta (all since deceased), for trial, for offences 
punishable under Sections 147, 148, 149, 307, 324, 325 and 
323 of IPC and issued warrants.
viii)	 Aggrieved, the appellants challenged the order dated 05.09.1992 
of the trial Court before the High Court in Criminal Revision No. 
1318 of 1992, wherein an interim order was passed staying the 
order of 05.09.1992. 
ix)	
The criminal revision was ultimately dismissed on 03.04.2015 
after it remained pending for nearly twenty-three years. It is the 
case of the appellants’ party that the dismissal of the criminal 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
293
Naushey Ali & Ors. v. State of U.P. & Anr.
revision was not known to them till October, 2022, when they 
received summons from the trial Court.
x)	
It appears that, in the meantime, due to the intervention of the 
elderly persons in the village, on 19.12.2022, a compromise was 
entered into between the injured Mahmood and the appellants. 
xi)	
Based on the compromise and affidavit of the injured Mahmood, 
the appellant and three others filed application under Section 
482 CrPC numbered as Criminal Misc. Application No. 1315 of 
2023 before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad praying for 
quashment of the entire proceedings in view of the compromise 
entered into between the parties on 19.12.2022. 
xii)	 It has also come on record that Case No. 248 of 1991 lodged 
on 11.08.1991 by the appellants’ party was settled during the 
lifetime of Abdul Waris. There is no dispute that the said case 
is not pending. 
xiii)	 However, vide the impugned order, on the ground that the 
matter related to an offence under Section 307 IPC in which 
there are injuries and a fracture of the head of distal phalanx of 
left ring finger received by R-2 Mahmood, the High Court held 
that the matter cannot be compounded. The relevant part of 
the judgment of the High Court is set out herein below:-
“Although it is a common ground between both the 
learned counsels that parties have entered into 
compromise and have settled their dispute outside 
the Court. The said compromise has been filed by 
separate affidavits and has also been filed by the 
injured. Copy of which is Annexure-8 to the affidavit 
but since the matter relates to offence under Section 
307 IPC in which there are injuries and even fracture 
of head of distal phalanx of left ring finger received 
by Mehboob Ali and looking to the settled law with 
regard to compounding of offence, the matter cannot 
be compounded”
(Emphasis supplied)
xiv)	 Aggrieved, five of the eight petitioners before the High Court 
are in appeal before us. Three others have passed away.
294
4.	
We have heard Mr. Anupam Mishra, learned counsel for the 
appellants, Ms. Garima Prashad, learned Senior Advocate and AAG 
for the respondent No.1-State of U.P. and Mr. Harikumar V., learned 
counsel for respondent No.2- Mahmood. We have also perused the 
records of the case as well as the written submissions filed by the 
appellants. 
5.	
The only question that arises for consideration is: Is the present 
case a fit case where proceeding could be quashed, particularly 
when Section 307 IPC has inter alia been invoked in the summons?
6.	
At the outset, we want to set right the error that occurs in the short 
order of the High Court. The High Court has not appreciated the 
difference between compounding of an offence and quashment 
of proceedings. As explained in Gian Singh vs. State of Punjab 
and Another (2012) 10 SCC 303, quashing of offence or criminal 
proceedings on the ground of settlement between an offender and 
victim is not the same thing as compounding of offence. This Court, 
highlighting the difference, had the following to say:-
“57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the 
ground of settlement between an offender and victim is 
not the same thing as compounding of offence. They are 
different and not interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the 
power of compounding of offences given to a court under 
Section 320 is materially different from the quashing of 
criminal proceedings by the High Court in exercise of its 
inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of offences, power 
of a criminal court is circumscribed by the provisions 
contained in Section 320 and the court is guided solely and 
squarely thereby while, on the other hand, the formation of 
opinion by the High Court for quashing a criminal offence 
or criminal proceeding or criminal complaint is guided by 
the material on record as to whether the ends of justice 
would justify such exercise of power although the ultimate 
consequence may be acquittal or dismissal of indictment.
58. Where the High Court quashes a criminal proceeding 
having regard to the fact that the dispute between the 
offender and the victim has been settled although the 
offences are not compoundable, it does so as in its opinion, 
continuation of criminal proceedings will be an exercise in 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
295
Naushey Ali & Ors. v. State of U.P. & Anr.
futility and justice in the case demands that the dispute 
between the parties is put to an end and peace is restored; 
securing the ends of justice being the ultimate guiding 
factor. No doubt, crimes are acts which have harmful effect 
on the public and consist in wrongdoing that seriously 
endangers and threatens the well-being of the society and 
it is not safe to leave the crime-doer only because he and 
the victim have settled the dispute amicably or that the 
victim has been paid compensation, yet certain crimes 
have been made compoundable in law, with or without 
the permission of the court. In respect of serious offences 
like murder, rape, dacoity, etc., or other offences of mental 
depravity under IPC or offences of moral turpitude under 
special statutes, like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the 
offences committed by public servants while working in that 
capacity, the settlement between the offender and the victim 
can have no legal sanction at all. However, certain offences 
which overwhelmingly and predominantly bear civil flavour 
having arisen out of civil, mercantile, commercial, financial, 
partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising 
out of matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the 
family dispute, where the wrong is basically to the victim 
and the offender and the victim have settled all disputes 
between them amicably, irrespective of the fact that such 
offences have not been made compoundable, the High 
Court may within the framework of its inherent power, quash 
the criminal proceeding or criminal complaint or FIR if it 
is satisfied that on the face of such settlement, there is 
hardly any likelihood of the offender being convicted and 
by not quashing the criminal proceedings, justice shall 
be casualty and ends of justice shall be defeated. The 
above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Each case will 
depend on its own facts and no hard-and-fast category 
can be prescribed.”
(Emphasis supplied)
7.	
As would be additionally clear from a close reading of the above two 
paragraphs, even though compounding and quashing are conceptually 
different, this Court was careful in pointing out that merely because 
there is a settlement, for certain categories of offences proceedings 
296
will not be quashed. This is on the premise that crimes that have 
harmful effects on the public and consist of wrongdoing that seriously 
endangers and threatens the well-being of the society cannot be 
quashed, only because the accused and the victim have amicably 
settled the matter.
8.	
Coming to the facts, notwithstanding the fact that the High Court has 
mixed up the concepts of compounding and powers of quashment, 
still the case needs to be considered from the point of view of 
Section 482. 
9.	
Will the mere mention of Section 307 IPC in the criminal proceedings 
force the court to adopt a hands-off approach, when parties come 
forward with a settlement? In that event, what should be the duty 
of the court and what are the tests to be applied to decide in which 
cases settlements would be accepted and in which cases it would 
not be?
10.	 In State of Madhya Pradesh vs. Laxmi Narayan and Others 
(2019) 5 SCC 688, after discussing the ratio in Narinder Singh and 
Others vs. State of Punjab and Another (2014) 6 SCC 466 and 
other judgments, this Court held:-
“15. Considering the law on the point and the other 
decisions of this Court on the point, referred to hereinabove, 
it is observed and held as under:
15.1. That the power conferred under Section 482 of 
the Code to quash the criminal proceedings for the non-
compoundable offences under Section 320 of the Code can 
be exercised having overwhelmingly and predominantly the 
civil character, particularly those arising out of commercial 
transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship or 
family disputes and when the parties have resolved the 
entire dispute amongst themselves;
15.2. Such power is not to be exercised in those 
prosecutions which involved heinous and serious offences 
of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, 
etc. Such offences are not private in nature and have a 
serious impact on society;
15.3. Similarly, such power is not to be exercised for the 
offences under the special statutes like the Prevention 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
297
Naushey Ali & Ors. v. State of U.P. & Anr.
of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public 
servants while working in that capacity are not to be 
quashed merely on the basis of compromise between the 
victim and the offender;
15.4. Offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms Act, 
etc. would fall in the category of heinous and serious 
offences and therefore are to be treated as crime against 
the society and not against the individual alone, and 
therefore, the criminal proceedings for the offence under 
Section 307 IPC and/or the Arms Act, etc. which have 
a serious impact on the society cannot be quashed in 
exercise of powers under Section 482 of the Code, on 
the ground that the parties have resolved their entire 
dispute amongst themselves. However, the High Court 
would not rest its decision merely because there is a 
mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is 
framed under this provision. It would be open to the High 
Court to examine as to whether incorporation of Section 
307 IPC is there for the sake of it or the prosecution has 
collected sufficient evidence, which if proved, would lead 
to framing the charge under Section 307 IPC. For this 
purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the 
nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted 
on the vital/delicate parts of the body, nature of weapons 
used, etc. However, such an exercise by the High Court 
would be permissible only after the evidence is collected 
after investigation and the charge-sheet is filed/charge 
is framed and/or during the trial. Such exercise is not 
permissible when the matter is still under investigation. 
Therefore, the ultimate conclusion in paras 29.6 and 29.7 
of the decision of this Court in Narinder Singh should be 
read harmoniously and to be read as a whole and in the 
circumstances stated hereinabove;
15.5. While exercising the power under Section 482 of 
the Code to quash the criminal proceedings in respect 
of non-compoundable offences, which are private in 
nature and do not have a serious impact on society, 
on the ground that there is a settlement/compromise 
between the victim and the offender, the High Court is 
298
required to consider the antecedents of the accused; the 
conduct of the accused, namely, whether the accused 
was absconding and why he was absconding, how 
he had managed with the complainant to enter into a 
compromise, etc.”
(Emphasis supplied)
11.	 Before we apply this judgment to the facts, it will be worthwhile to 
recall the observations of Sikri, J. in Narinder Singh (supra):-
“26. Having said so, we would hasten to add that though 
it is a serious offence as the accused person(s) attempted 
to take the life of another person/victim, at the same time 
the court cannot be oblivious to hard realities that many 
times whenever there is a quarrel between the parties 
leading to physical commotion and sustaining of injury by 
either or both the parties, there is a tendency to give it 
a slant of an offence under Section 307 IPC as well. …”
(Emphasis supplied)
12.	 Coming back to Laxmi Narayan (supra), this Court has held that 
mere mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge-sheet 
should not be the basis for adopting a hands-off approach. It has 
further held that it would be open for the court to examine as to 
whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of 
it or whether there is evidence to back it. It has been held that the 
courts may go by the nature of injuries sustained; as to whether 
the injuries are inflicted on the vital/ delicate parts of the body and 
the nature of weapon used. It has also been clarified that such 
an exercise would be permissible after investigation and filing of 
chargesheet/framing of charges or during the trial. [See 15.4 of 
Laxmi Narayan (supra)].
13.	 Coming to the facts of the case, admittedly, there is a settlement 
between the parties. The case filed by the appellants’ party which 
was prior in point of time and that too on the same day of occurrence, 
has been settled. 
14.	 It should be recalled that, at the outset, after investigation, the police 
actually closed the case in its final report of 07.09.1991. It was the 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
299
Naushey Ali & Ors. v. State of U.P. & Anr.
trial Court, which by its order of 05.09.1992, refused to accept the 
same and summoned the appellants. The incident is of 11.08.1991, 
i.e. about 33½ years back. No doubt, there is a reference to the firing 
in the FIR but admittedly there was no injury. The allegation is that 
firing was done by Abdul Waris. He is since deceased. The facts, 
assuming to be true, also do not make out a case of common object 
for the appellants under Section 149 IPC insofar as the offence of 
Section 307 is concerned. 
15.	 The role attributed to the seven members, including the five 
appellants is not specific. General allegation was that they abused 
in filthy language and assaulted Mahmood with lathi and iron bars. 
The specific individual role was only attributed to Adbul Waris, who 
is since deceased. 
16.	 In any event, the police who investigated disbelieved the entire story. 
No recoveries have been made of any pellets. What engaged the 
attention of the High Court was only the fracture of the head of the 
distal phalanx of left finger of respondent No.2. 
17.	 We have seen the injuries sustained by Mahmood (R-2) from the 
medical evidence collected. From the injury report, it is clear that 
while the first four injuries were contusions and abrasions, injury Nos. 
5, 6 and 7 pertained to incised lacerated wound and swelling on the 
middle finger of the left hand. We have also seen the x-ray report 
which shows that in the left hand there was a fracture of the head 
of distal phalanx of left ring finger. Assuming that this was the result 
of injury with lathis or iron bar, applying the test in Laxmi Narayan 
(supra), considering the injury and the nature of the weapon used, 
certainly no offence under Section 307 IPC is made out. 
18.	 Section 307 of IPC reads as under:- 
“307. Attempt to murder.—
Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, 
and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused 
death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and 
if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the offender 
shall be liable either to imprisonment for life, or to such 
punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned.
300
Attempts by life convicts.— When any person offending 
under this section is under sentence of imprisonment for 
life, he may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death.”
19.	 Keeping in mind the surrounding circumstances, the nature of the 
weapon and the nature of the injury, on facts, we are inclined to 
conclude that the overt act attributed to the appellants does not bring 
the case within the four corners of the Section 307 of IPC, either on 
a stand-alone basis or as held above with the aid of Section 149 
of IPC.
20.	 We are also inclined to conclude that considering the overall 
circumstances, the nature of the weapon and the nature of the injury 
(fracture of the head of distal phalanx of left ring finger), the offence 
alleged, on facts, does not fall in that category of cases where the 
court should deny relief in the event of a settlement. At the highest, 
the offence alleged could be one under Section 326 of IPC. It could 
not be said, on facts, considering all the circumstances that this is 
a crime which has such an harmful effect on the public and that it 
has the effect of seriously threatening the well-being of the society. 
We make it clear that we are saying so on the facts of the present 
case. We are also firmly of the opinion that proceeding with the trial, 
when parties have amicably resolved the dispute in the present case, 
would be futile and the ends of justice require that the settlement 
be given effect to by quashing the proceedings. It would be a grave 
abuse of process to let this trial remain pending under the above 
circumstances, particularly when the dispute is settled and resolved. 
21.	 It should also be borne in mind that this was a case which resulted in 
a closure report from the side of the police. The State has also before 
us, after placing the law, fairly left it to the court to take a decision. 
22.	 In Ramgopal v. State of M.P. (2022) 14 SCC 531, Surya Kant, J. 
speaking for this court, in a case involving a charge under Section 
326 IPC, while annulling the proceedings, felicitously set out the 
statement of law and applied it to the facts of the said case as under: 
“19. We thus sum up and hold that as opposed to Section 
320 CrPC where the Court is squarely guided by the 
compromise between the parties in respect of offences 
“compoundable” within the statutory framework, the 
extraordinary power enjoined upon a High Court under 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
301
Naushey Ali & Ors. v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Section 482 CrPC or vested in this Court under Article 142 
of the Constitution, can be invoked beyond the metes and 
bounds of Section 320 CrPC. Nonetheless, we reiterate 
that such powers of wide amplitude ought to be exercised 
carefully in the context of quashing criminal proceedings, 
bearing in mind:
19.1. Nature and effect of the offence on the conscience 
of the society; 
19.2. Seriousness of the injury, if any; 
19.3 Voluntary nature of compromise between the accused 
and the victim; and
19.4 Conduct of the accused persons, prior to and after the 
occurrence of the purported offence and/or other relevant 
considerations. 
20. Having appraised the aforestated parameters and 
weighing upon the peculiar facts and circumstances of the 
two appeals before us, we are inclined to invoke powers 
under Article 142 and quash the criminal proceedings and 
consequently set aside the conviction in both the appeals. 
We say so for the reasons that: 
20.1. Firstly, the occurrence(s) involved in these appeals 
can be categorised as purely personal or having overtones 
of criminal proceedings of private nature. 
20.2. Secondly, the nature of injuries incurred, for which 
the appellants have been convicted, do not appear to 
exhibit their mental depravity or commission of an offence 
of such a serious nature that quashing of which would 
override public interest. 
20.3. Thirdly, given the nature of the offence and injuries, 
it is immaterial that the trial against the appellants had 
been concluded or their appeal(s) against conviction stand 
dismissed. 
20.4. Fourthly, the parties on their own volition, without 
any coercion or compulsion, willingly and voluntarily have 
buried their differences and wish to accord a quietus to 
their dispute(s). 
302
20.5. Fifthly, the occurrence(s) in both the cases took 
place way back in the years 2000 and 1995, respectively. 
There is nothing on record to evince that either before or 
after the purported compromise, any untoward incident 
transpired between the parties. 
20.6. Sixthly, since the appellants and the complainant(s) 
are residents of the same village(s) and/or work in close 
vicinity, the quashing of criminal proceedings will advance 
peace, harmony, and fellowship amongst the parties who 
have decided to forget and forgive any ill will and have 
no vengeance against each other. 
20.7. Seventhly, the cause of administration of criminal 
justice system would remain un-effected on acceptance 
of the amicable settlement between the parties and/or 
resultant acquittal of the appellants; more so looking at 
their present age.”
23.	  Considering the special features of the case and taking the settlement 
on record and applying the law, we find that this is a fit case where 
proceedings in complaint case No. 8023 of 2015 arising out of Case 
Crime No. 248 of 1991 pending in the Court of Additional Chief 
Judicial Magistrate, Court No.5, Moradabad should be quashed. 
24.	 In view of the above, we allow the Appeal. The order of the High 
Court in application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. No. 1315 of 2023 
dated 19.01.2023 shall stand set aside and proceeding in Complaint 
Case No. 8023 of 2015 arising out of Case Crime No. 248 of 1991 
pending in the Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court 
No. 5, Moradabad shall stand quashed. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey