[2025] 7 S.C.R. 427 : 2025 INSC 801
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. 
v. 
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 7372 of 2025)
04 June 2025
[Sanjay Karol* and Prashant Kumar Mishra, JJ.] 
Issue for Consideration
(i) Whether letter dated 25.09.2019 sent by the Deputy Secretary of 
State Government can be construed to be an order - Connectedly, 
whether the appellants would be entitled to the relief of deemed 
closure, as on 27.10.2019 by virtue of the deeming fiction present 
in s. 25-O(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; (ii) What would be 
the meaning of the phrase ‘appropriate Government’ and whether 
in the facts of this case, it was the appropriate Government acting 
in the matter of the closure - if not what is the effect in law, thereof.
Headnotes†
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 – s.25-O(1), 25-O(3) – Industrial 
Dispute (Maharashtra) Rules, 1957 – r.82-B(1) – Appellant-HSML 
was engaged in biscuit manufacturing exclusively for BIL under 
Job Work Agreements (JWA) – JWA was terminated by BIL – 
Resultantly, applications for closure of business were made 
to the competent authorities on 26.08.2019 – By a letter dated 
25.09.2019 sent by Dy. Secretary, State Government informed 
HSML that they failed to disclose their efforts to prevent 
closure, nor had they given cogent reasons for closure and 
were, therefore, asked to resubmit their application – By way 
of reply dated 10.10.2019, HSML furnished the particulars as 
asked for – It is to be noted that the 60-day period provided for 
u/s. 25-O(3) of the Act ran out on 27.10.2019 – On 04.11.2019, 
HSML was once again asked to resubmit their application 
as authorities found response of HSML lacking – HSML in 
their response contended that by virtue of s.25-O(3), the 
permission of closure is deemed to have been granted  – 
The Deputy Commissioner sent to HSML two letters, dated 
20.11.2019 and 22.11.2019 asking them to be present for a 
meeting on 26.11.2019, and conveying to them that the State 
Government was yet to grant permission for closure – Letters 
* Author
428
Supreme Court Reports
dated 04.11.2019, 20.11.2019 and 22.11.2019 were challenged 
before High Court – High Court, by the impugned judgment, 
dismissed the writ petitions – Correctness: 
Held: There is nothing on record to show that the Dy. Secretary was 
duly authorised to conduct communication and/or accept or reject 
applications for closure made by industrial units – The concerned 
authority in that regard is only the Minister – There is no express 
authority resting with the Deputy Secretary – Reliance cannot be 
placed on internal noting to establish compliance with procedure – 
s.25-O specifically provides “by order and for reasons to be recorded 
in writing,” and so, reasons are a statutory necessity  – When 
the minister is the sole authority, endorsement of a view taken 
by an undisclosed officer of the Ministry cannot be said to be an 
‘application of mind’ by the competent authority – The decision had 
to be top down and not otherwise – The necessary conclusion is 
that the letter dated 25.09.2019 addressed by the Deputy Secretary 
to HSML cannot be constituted to be an order since such order 
to resubmit the application was without any authority since it was 
not the appropriate Government acting in that regard and not an 
order rejecting or accepting the application – The appropriate 
Government failed to make and communicate any order on the 
application for closure – The deemed closure would, therefore, 
come into effect – In that view of the matter, application dated 
28.08.2019 was complete in all respects, and the 60-day period 
for the deemed closure to take effect would be calculable from 
said date – Also, the Deputy Secretary was not the appropriate 
Government who could have asked HSML to revise and resubmit 
the application for closure – That authority is only vested with the 
Minister concerned. [Paras 15, 16, 17, 18, 22]
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 – s.25-O – Scope of:
Held: i) The right to close the business is subject to the interest 
of the general public; ii) any application seeking permission for 
closure must disclose adequate and genuine reasons which the 
authority has to have regard for; iii) in certain cases, however, even 
if the reasons are genuine and adequate, it does not mean that 
permission to close ought to be granted; iv) if it is found that the 
reasons are generally adequate, and despite that the appropriate 
Government decides for refusal of permission of foreclosure, then 
the interest of the general public involved in that particular case 
must be “compelling” and “overriding”; v) financial difficulty on its 
own cannot constitute the reason for shutting down the business – 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
429
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
An employer must demonstrate exceptional circumstances or an 
impossibility of running the business. [Para 13]
Constitution of India – Art.19(1)(g) – Freedom of trade, 
profession, occupation and business – Right to shut down 
business – Elucidated:
Held: If there exists the freedom to set up and run a trade/business 
as one sees fit, necessarily, there has to be a set of rights vesting 
with the proprietor/owner to take decisions as may be in his best 
interest – At the same time, law does not permit such owner or 
proprietor to take any and all decisions without having considered 
and accounted for the impact that it shall have on the employees 
or workers that are part of this establishment – This is evidenced 
by the s. 25-O of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 providing for a 
detailed procedure to be followed when a person wishes to ‘shut 
shop’, but concomitant providing that if the concerned Government 
does not take action with reasonable expediency, the business 
owner should not be saddled with the costs and responsibilities of 
running the business indefinitely, till such time the authority arrives 
at a proper and just decision – The sum and substance are that 
Art. 19(1)(g) includes the right to shut down a business but is, of 
course, subject to reasonable restrictions. [Para 10]
Case Law Cited
Cooverjee B. Bharucha v. Excise Commr. [1954] SCR 873 : 
(1954) 1 SCC 18; Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. v. Workmen [1967] 
1 SCR 652 : 1966 SCC OnLine SC 106; Excel Wear v. Union 
of India [1979] 1 SCR 1009 : (1978) 4 SCC 224; Orissa Textile 
and Steel v. State of Orissa [2002] 1 SCR 309 : (2002) 2 SCC 
578 – followed.
Ajaib Singh v. Sirhind Coop. Marketing-cum-Processing Service 
Society Ltd. [1999] 2 SCR 505 : (1999) 6 SCC 82; Star Enterprises v. 
City and Industrial Development Corpn. of Maharashtra Ltd. [1990] 
2 SCR 826 : (1990) 3 SCC 280 – relied on.
Bachhittar Singh v. State of Punjab [1962] Supp. 3 SCR 713 : 
AIR 1963 SC 395; Sethi Auto Services Station v. DDA [2008] 14 
SCR 598 : (2009) 1 SCC 180; Shanti Sports Club v. Union of India 
[2009] 13 SCR 710 : (2009) 15 SCC 705; State of Haryana v. 
Hitkari Potteries (2001) 10 SCC 74; Sree Meenakshi Textile Mills 
Ltd. v. Madurai Textile Workers Union (CITU) & Ors., 1979 (38) FLR 
213; Pimpri Chinchwad New Township Development Authority v. 
430
Supreme Court Reports
Vishnudev Coop. Housing Society [2018] 11 SCR 310 : (2018) 8 
SCC 215; Mahabir Jute Mills Ltd. v. Shibban Lal Saxena [1976] 
1 SCR 168 : (1975) 2 SCC 818 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Industrial Dispute (Maharashtra) Rules, 1957; 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
List of Keywords
Closure of business; Closing down an undertaking; Permission 
of closure; Closure application; Job work agreement; Efforts to 
prevent closure; Not given cogent reasons for closure; Functus 
officio; Workers’ unions; Form XXIV-C prescribed u/r.82-B(1) of 
the Industrial Dispute (Maharashtra) Rules, 1957; Form XXIV-B 
prescribed u/r.82-B(1) of the Industrial Dispute (Maharashtra) 
Rules, 1957; Relief of deemed closure; Deeming fiction in 
s.25-O(3) of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; Freedom of trade, 
profession, occupation and business; Appropriate government; 
Right to shut down a business; Minister of Labour; Internal noting; 
Non-application of mind; Minister is the sole authority; Top Down 
decision; Order without authority; Communication without legal 
sanction; Sub-delegation to officer.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 7372 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 17.02.2023 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in WP No. 3447 of 2019
With
Civil Appeal No. 7373 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Mukul Rohatgi, Sr. Adv., Ms. Nina Nariman, Abhay Jadeja, Praveen 
Kumar, Arun Unikrishnan, Ms. Pragya Baghel, Ms. Sunaina Kumar.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Shailesh S. Pathak, Nitin S. Tambwekar, Seshatalpa Sai Bandaru, 
Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Shrirang B. 
Varma, Sourav Singh, Jitendra Kumar Tripathi, Aditya Mishra, 
Ratish Kumar Sharma.
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
431
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol, J.
This judgment, for clarity and ease of reference, is divided as follows:
TABLE OF CONTENTS*
THE APPEALS ...........................................................................
2
BACKGROUND TO THE WRIT PETITIONS ..............................
3
THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT ................................................... 13
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES ............................................. 17
A.	
Appellants ......................................................................... 17
B.	
Respondents .................................................................... 21
QUESTIONS TO BE CONSIDERED ......................................... 23
ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION .................................................. 24
CONCLUSION ............................................................................ 42
Leave Granted. 
THE APPEALS 
2.	
These appeals by special leave, question the correctness of a 
judgment and order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, 
dated 17th February 20231, in Writ Petition No.3447 of 2019 and Writ 
Petition No.3397 of 2019, preferred by the appellants herein in Civil 
Appeal arising out of SLP(C)No.4268 of 2019 and by the appellant 
in Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C)No.4565 of 2023, respectively. 
1	
Hereinafter ‘impugned judgment’
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.
432
Supreme Court Reports
BACKGROUND TO THE WRIT PETITIONS 
3.	
The factual backdrop in which the writ petitions came to be filed is 
indisputably identical. As such we refer to the facts of the first appeal, 
which are as below : 
3.1	 Harinagar Sugar Mills Limited (Biscuit Division)2 is a company 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 and was engaged 
in biscuit manufacturing for Britannia Industries Limited3.
3.2	 Such manufacturing by HSML had been exclusively for BIL, 
and had been ongoing for more than three decades, under 
Job Work Agreements4, granted by the latter to the former and 
extended from time to time. 
3.3	 JWA was terminated by BIL with effect from 20th November 
2019, vide letter dated 24th May 2019, stating that the 180-day 
notice period, as mandated by clause 20.3.1 of the JWA signed 
on 22nd May 2007, would begin from 1st June 2019. The letter 
is extracted as under :-
“ANNEXURE P/1
BRITANNIA INDUSTRIES LIMITED 
Prestige Shantiniketan, White Field Main Road 
Mahadevpura Post, Bengaluru-560048
Without prejudice 
By Speed Post/Courier/Email
Date: 24th May 2019
To, 
M/s Harinagar Sugar Mills Limited 
207, Kalbaddevi Road, 
Mumbai-400002, Maharashtra, India
CC: World Trade Centre, Centre-1, 10 th Floor, 
Caffe Parade, Mumbai-400 005
2	
Abbreviated as ‘HSML’
3	
Abbreviated as ‘BIL’
4	
Abbreviated as ‘JWA’
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
433
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
Kind Attention : Mr. Ashok Kumar Jasrpuria
Sub : Termination of the job work Agreement
Ref:
a. Job work Agreement dated 22nd May, 2007. 
b. Job Work Agreement Renewal dated 23rd Oct, 
2013 (effective from 18th Feb 2013 till 17th 
Feb 2023)
Dear Sir,
We refer to job work agreement dated 22nd May, 2007 
entered for period of 10 years effective from 21st February, 
2003 and renewed on same terms and conditions for 
another period of 10 years effective from 18th February, 
2013 whereby based on your representations, we have 
appointed you as our Contract Manufacturer on the terms 
and conditions contained therein.
Pursuant to clause 20.3.1 of the Job Work Agreement, we 
hereby serve you One Hundred Eight (180) days written 
notice commencing from 1st June 2019 (“Effective date”). 
The business relationship between the parties under the 
Agreement shall stand terminated on the close of business 
hours of 27th November, 2019.
You are requested to discontinue the operations under 
the agreement accordingly upon termination and cease to 
the know-how-return, all copies of the Know-how without 
retaining any part thereof, and deliver entre quantity of 
goods manufactured, ingredients, packing material and 
Raw Material etc. which are in your possession or custody 
as per the terms of the agreement.
Further, you are requested to return all the documents 
containing information relating to products and Intellectual 
Property Rights of the Company and refrain from sharing, 
exchanging or selling or making any copies, summaries 
or transcripts of confidential information of the Company.
Sd/- 
Britannia Industries Ltd.” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
434
Supreme Court Reports
3.4	 Resultantly, applications for closure of business were made to 
the competent authorities on 26th August 2019, as per Form 
XXIV-C prescribed under Rule 82-B(1) of the Industrial Dispute 
(Maharashtra) Rules, 1957 read with Section 25-O(1) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 19475. The workers of HSML were 
informed vide closure notices dated 28th August 2019. The 
letter is extracted below: 
“HARINAGAR SUGAR MILLS LIMITED 
(BISCUIT DIVISION) 
Conductors of the Factory & Business of  
Shangrilla Food Products Limited 
Regd. Office : 207 Katbadevi Road, Mumbai-400002
Pl. Correspondence to: 
L.B.S. Marg. Bhandup (W),  
Mumbai-400078.
Ref No. 
Dated : 28.08.2019
From-XXIV-C 
(To be submitted in triplicate) 
[See Rule 82-B(1)]
From of application for permission of closure to be made 
by an employer under sub-Section (1) of Section 25-O of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947)
To,
The Secretary to the Government of Maharashtra 
Industries, Energy and Labour Department, Mantralaya, 
Mumbai-32.
Sir,
Under Section 25-O of the Industrial disputes Act, 1947 
(14 of 1947), I hereby inform you that I propose to close 
down the undertaking specified below.
5	
Hereinafter, ‘the Act’
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
435
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
M/s Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division), (herein 
after referred to as Biscuit Division), L.B.S. Marg, Bhandup 
(W), Mumbai-400078 w.e.f. 28/11/2019.
The Biscuit Division had entered into, a job, work 
agreement with M/s Britannia Industries Ltd. (BIL) to 
manufacture biscuits of Britannia brand. BIL used to 
forward to the Biscuit Division its weekly plan as per the 
market demand of various varieties of Britannia Brand. 
The Biscuit Division then used to manufacture the biscuits 
as per the plan forwarded by BIL in the factory premises 
A written termination notice was received by the Biscuit 
Division on 31-05-2019 from BIL stating that the business 
relationship between the parties shall stand terminated 
on the close of business hours, of 27/11/2019. Thus BIL 
has terminated the job work agreement with the Biscuit 
Division and the said Division has no other manufacturing 
avenue, since the said Division was manufacturing biscuits 
only for BIL. In view of the above, the Biscuit Division has 
no other alternative but to close down, the manufacturing 
activities. 
2. The number of workmen whose service will be terminated 
on account of the closure of the undertaking is 178 
permanent workmen. 
3. Permission is solicited for the proposed closure. 
4. I hereby declared that in the event of approval for the 
closure being granted every workmen in the undertaking 
to whom sub-section (9) of the said section 25-O applies 
will be given notice and paid compensation as specified 
in section 25N of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 
of 1947), as if the workman had been retrenched under 
that section. 
Yours faithfully 
For Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division)
Sd/- Illegible 
(Authorised Signatory)
436
Supreme Court Reports
CC:	 1)	
The Commissioner of Labour, 
Maharashtra, Mumbai
	
2)	
The Industries Commissioner,  
Maharashtra, Mumbai
	
3) The Joint Director of Industries, Mumbai”
(Emphasis supplied)
3.5	 Letter dated 25th September 2019 sent by the Deputy 
Secretary, Government of Maharashtra, informed HSML that 
they failed to disclose their efforts to prevent closure, nor had 
they given cogent reasons for closure. They were, therefore, 
asked to resubmit their application. This letter forms an 
important aspect of the respondents’ case before the High Court 
and, therefore, it would be appropriate for it to be extracted. 
It reads : 
“ANNEXURE P/5
Government of Maharashtra
No. Closure-82019/C.No.3/L-2 
Industry, Energy & Labour Dept. 
Madam Cama Road 
Hutama Rajguru Chowk 
Mantralaya, Mumbai-400032
Dated : 25TH September, 2019
To, 
Authorised Signatory, 
M/s. Hari Nagar Sugar Mills Limited, 
L.B.S. Marg, Bhandup (W) 
Mumbai-400 078.
Subject:-	
Application for obtaining permission  
U/s. 25(O)(1) for closing down establishment 
of M/s Hari Nagar Sugar Mills Ltd. at L.B.S. 
Marg, Bhandup (W), Mumbai-78
Reference:	 Your application dated 28/8.2019.
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
437
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
Sir,
With reference to the above referred application, you 
as authorised signatory of M/s. Hari Nagar Sugar Mills 
Ltd. have submitted an application to the Government 
on 28/8/2019 u/s 25(O)(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947 for closing down the unit at L.B.S. Marg, Bhandup 
(W) Mumbai-78.
2.	
On reviewing the said application it is observed that 
the job contract agreement signed by M/s. Hari Nagar 
Sugar Mills Ltd. with M/s. Britania Industries Ltd. for 
production of biscuits will be cancelled with effect 
from 27.11.2019 and therefore the management of 
the Company has given the reason that the said 
Biscuit Division will not be able to provide any work 
in the said Division, and therefore the application to 
obtain permission to close down said Biscuit Division 
was submitted to the Government on 28.08.2019.
3.	
However, no pros and cons about the efforts for 
not closing down the said Unit were discussed/
enlisted in the said application. Also, any justifiable 
and consummate reasons were also not provided 
for closing down the said Division. Therefore, it will 
be possible to take action only if you can submit the 
application again by providing explanation regarding 
other efforts initiated by you for not closing down the 
Division, providing justifiable as well as consummate 
rationale for this action. 
Yours faithfully, 
Signed 
Dy. Secretary, Govt. of Maharashtra
Copy :
1.	
Hon. Labour Commission, Kamgar Bhavan, C-20, 
E-Block, Bandra-Kurla Complex, Bandra (E), 
Mumbai-400 051.
2.	
Private Secretary to Hon. Minister (Labour)”
(Emphasis supplied) 
438
Supreme Court Reports
3.6	 By way of reply dated 10th October 2019, HSML furnished the 
particulars as asked for. It is to be noted here that the 60-day 
period provided for under Section 25-O(3) of the Act ran out on 
27th October 2019. The said letter reads as under :
“Annexure P/6
HARINAGAR SUAR MILLS LIMITED 
(BISCUIT DIVISION) 
Conductors of the Factory & Business of 
Shangrilla Food Products Limited 
Regd. Office : 207 Katbadevi Road, Mumbai-400002
Pl. Correspondence to : 
L.B.S. Marg. Bhandup (W),  
Mumbai-400 078.
Ref. No.76/19-20 
Date: 10.10.2019
To 
Shri S.M. Sathe, 
The Dy. Secretary, 
State of Maharashtra 
Mantralaya Mumbai
Sub:	 Permission sought under Section 25-(O)(I) of Ld. 
Act for closure of M/s. Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. 
(Biscuit Division)
Ref:	
Your letter dated 25.09.2019.
On 01.10.2019 we have received your letter dated 
25.09.2019 with regard to the aforesaid subject.
It is a fact that for last 32 years, the Company used to do job 
work of manufacturing biscuits only for Britannia Industries 
Ltd. For manufacturing biscuits for Britannia Industries Ltd., 
the raw material as well as necessary plant and machinery 
used to be provided and installed by Britannia Industries 
Ltd. After receiving termination of Job work agreement from 
BIL, the Company Immediately persuaded the management 
of BIL to continue agreement and the job work with the 
Company. However, said persuasion did not work or yield 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
439
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
any result. The Company had then approached other 
biscuit manufacturers such as M/s. Mondelez India Limited 
and Us. ITC Ltd. On 15.07.2019, the top management of 
the Company had meeting with Mr. T. Arunkumar, CMO, 
Manager of M/s. Mondelez India Limited and then as per 
his requirement had forwarded e-mail on 24.07.2109. 
However, thereafter there was no response. Similarly the top 
management of the Company had discussed with Mr. Divi 
of M/s. ITC, Foods. However, on 17.07.2019 Mr. Div replied 
that there is no requirement of contract manufacturing unit 
to them at present. Once again on 24.07.2019 mail was 
forwarded to Mr. Divi of M/s. ITC Foods but there was no 
response to the said mail. We enclose copies of e-mails 
forwarded to M/s. Mondelez India Ltd. and Ms. ITC Foods 
The management of the Company had also talked and 
discussed with Mr. Ajay Chauhan of Parle Biscuits to 
provide job work to the Company. However, there was no 
positive response even from Parle Biscuits.
The reason for closing down the manufacturing activities is 
there is no job work which can be done in the said factory. 
As stated in the closure application the company for last 32 
years was doing only the job work for Britannia Industries 
Ltd. And the efforts mentioned hereinabove will support 
the contention of the company that there is no other way 
out but to close its manufacturing operation.
For Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. 
(Biscuit Division) 
Sd/- 
Authorised Signatory)” 
(Emphasis supplied) 
3.7	 The authorities once again found the response lacking. Vide 
letter dated 4th November 2019 said that their earlier response 
did not, once again, cover all aspects, i.e., the possibility of 
the employees’ absorption into other manufacturing divisions 
and also the possibility of HSML moving to the production of 
other goods, apart from biscuits. They were once again asked 
to resubmit their application.
440
Supreme Court Reports
3.8	 On 22nd November 2019 HSML, in their response, contented 
that by virtue of Section 25-O(3) of the Act, the permission of 
closure is deemed to have been granted, and the authorities 
have now become functus officio. The workers’ unions also 
opposed the closure, registering the same vide letter dated 4th 
November 2019. They cited ‘ulterior motives’ and lack of bona 
fide reasons.
3.9	 The Deputy Commissioner, Labour, sent to HSML two letters, 
dated 20th and 22nd of November 2019 asking them to be present 
for a meeting on 26th November 2019, and conveying to them 
that the State Government was yet to grant permission for 
closure and as such, they should not close down the business 
on 27th November 2019, respectively. 
3.10	 Workers’ unions on the same day as their letter also approached 
the Industrial Tribunal seeking to restrain HSML from going 
forward with the closure. An ad-interim order came to be 
passed by the Tribunal, granting said relief. 
3.11	 These letters dated 4th November 2019, 20th November 2019 
and 22nd November 2019 were the subject matter of challenge 
before the High Court. 
THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT 
4.	
The proceedings before the High Court, the culmination of which 
was the judgment impugned in these appeals, were as follows: -
4.1	 Order dated 28th November 2019 records the statement of 
Mr. Ravi Kadam, Senior Counsel appearing for HSML that 
the salaries for the month of November shall be paid without 
insisting that the employees attend work. It is also recorded 
therein that the employees shall maintain peace and harmony. 
4.2	 On the next date, i.e., 12th December 2019 it was directed that 
the salaries for December be paid on or before 6th January 2020. 
4.3	 Arguments were heard and concluded on 7th February 2023.
4.4	 The findings in the impugned judgment can be summarised thus :
Firstly, the Court discussed the scheme of Section 25-O of the Act and 
found that an application for closure has to be made to a competent 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
441
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
authority at least 90 days prior to the date from which the closure 
is sought to be made effective; the reasons for such closure must 
be clearly stated; on receipt of such application, the ‘appropriate 
Government’ is to make an enquiry; provide an opportunity for hearing 
all concerned - workmen, employer and persons interested in closure, 
and then pass a reasoned order, also keeping in view interests of the 
general public. Section 25-O(3) provides that if such an appropriate 
authority fails to communicate an order made thereby, granting or 
denying permission within 90 days of the application being preferred, 
it shall be deemed that the permission was granted at the expiry of 
60 days. Other parts of Section 25 of the Act were also taken note 
of such as the power of review, the remaining in force of the order 
of the competent authority for a period of one year etc. 
Secondly, it was observed that the case of the petitioners (appellants 
before us) was that orders had not been passed by the competent 
authority within the statutorily prescribed time frame, and consequently, 
the deeming fiction provided for in the Act would come into force and 
permission of closure would be deemed granted upon the expiry of 
60 days from the application, since more than 90 days had passed 
since such making of application. The stand of the State was also 
taken into account - which was that the communication dated 25th 
September 2019 constituted an order refusing the grant of requisite 
permission. It would be appropriate to extract the consideration made 
by the High Court, of these contrasting submissions. It is as follows :
“24. The first objection of Mr. Naidu is that even if 
communications dated 25 September 2019 were to be 
assumed as decisions, the decisions are not taken by 
the authority, viz. Hon’ble Minister for Labour but the 
same is taken by the Depute Secretary. To counter the 
contention, the State Government has placed on record 
the file noting on the basis of which the communications 
dated 25 September 2019 were issued. The file noting 
would indicate that note was prepared by Desk Officer 
on 30 August 2019 stating that as per notification dated 
25 June 2013, the powers under Section 25-O (2) are 
conferred upon the Hon’ble Minister for Labour. It is further 
stated that the petitioners’ applications were required to 
be forwarded to the Hon’ble Minister for further action. 
However, there appears to be an endorsement in hand 
442
Supreme Court Reports
writing towards the end of the noting to the effect that 
petitioners failed to furnish complete and cogent reasons 
in their applications. The noting was approved by various 
officers in the hierarchy and finally came to be approved 
by Hon’ble Minister with a remark accepting hand written 
endorsement with further direction that the establishment 
should be intimated to file application with cogent reasons. 
In accordance with the above decision of the Hon’ble 
Minister, the letters dated 25 September 2019 were 
addressed to petitioners. We therefore repel the objection 
of the petitioners that the decision in communication was 
not taken by the Hon’ble Minister.”
Thirdly, the contention of HSML that the application dated 28th August 
2019 was complete in all respects and it ought to have been treated 
as such was considered. It was submitted that the letter dated 10th 
October 2019 (reproduced supra) was in response to the authorities 
asking them to resubmit. They supplied thereby, additional reasons 
for closure and the steps taken to prevent that eventuality. It was 
held that since the undisputed position is that vide letter dated 10th 
October 2019 HSML sought to furnish additional reasons, that ipso 
facto would amount to an acceptance that the application was not 
complete in all respects. That being the case, the deeming fiction 
would not come into play. Since the application was deficient, the 
State Government need not pass orders thereon. It was thereafter 
held as under:
“30.…The fact that authority was not convinced with the 
application of the petitioner and had communicated that 
cogent reasons are not spelt out in the application would 
be sufficient to conclude that the authority did not grant 
the application for closure. What was contemplated by 
letter dated 25 September 2019 was “re-submission” 
of the application. Petitioners however chose to add 
reasons to the pending applications on 10 October 2019. 
Petitioners failed to submit fresh applications by providing 
statement of reasons as directed by State Government 
vide letters dated 25 September 2019. This is the reason 
why the State Government was once again required to 
convey to petitioners that they were required to resubmit 
the applications by subsequent communications dated 4 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
443
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
November 2019. It is only after receipt of letters dated 
4 November 2019 petitioners took a stand of deemed 
permission under Section 25-O(3) of the ID Act in their 
letters dated 22 November 2019.
31. We are therefore unable to accept the contention raised 
on behalf of the petitioners that the closure applications 
filed by them on 28 August 2019 were complete in all 
respects so as to trigger deemed permission under 
provisions of Section 25 O(3) on expiration of period of 
60 days. Petitioners themselves accepted the position 
that the closure applications were incomplete by seeking 
to adduce reasons for closure by letters dated 10 October 
2019. It therefore cannot be held that the establishments 
of the petitioners are deemed to have been closed on 
expiration of period of 60 days from the date of submission 
of closure applications dated 28 August 2019.”
The Writ petitions were dismissed.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES 
5.	
We have heard Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel for the 
appellant - HSML as also the learned counsel appearing for the 
respondents. 
A.	
Appellants
i.	
The impugned judgment is based on an erroneous reliance 
on the ‘wrong form’, which originated out of a submission 
of learned Counsel for the State. Reliance was placed by 
the learned Division Bench on Form XXIV and instead, it 
should have considered Form XXIV-C. 
ii.	
The finding that the applications were incomplete is based 
on a misunderstanding/misapplication of the forms. 
iii.	
Noting in the internal office file cannot be used to construe 
what constitutes an order. Reference is made to Bachhittar 
Singh v. State of Punjab6; Sethi Auto Services Station v. 
6	
AIR 1963 SC 395
444
Supreme Court Reports
DDA7; and Shanti Sports Club v. Union of India8 to submit 
that the internal file noting does not constitute an order. 
Furthermore, even such a contention that the letter dated 
25th September 2019 is based on such noting is belied, 
for it does not say so. Instead, it only asks for details of 
the efforts made to avoid closure. 
iv.	
An application for closure can only be disposed of by an 
order in accordance with Section 25-O(2). If it is not so 
done, what has been provided for in Section 25-O(3) will 
kick in. 
v.	
The previous iteration of Section 25-O was struck down 
by this Court vide its judgment in Excel Wear v. Union 
of India9 on the ground that it did not prescribe a time 
limit for deciding the applications for closure. It was found 
that the restrictions were not in accordance with Article 
19(6) of the Constitution of India. The amended iteration 
was upheld vide judgment in Orissa Textile and Steel v. 
State of Orissa10, wherein it was held that the requirement 
to conduct an enquiry, give a hearing, pass a reasoned 
order, and also the time limit was the curing of defects 
present in the previous version of the section. It has been 
so submitted by the appellants to show that the 60-day 
requirement is mandatory. If not so observed, it would 
violate Article 19(1)(g). 
vi.	
It has not been shown by the respondents, how the 
applications made by the appellants are defective/
incomplete. Providing of further information cannot mean 
that the original application was defective. The decision in 
State of Haryana v. Hitkari Potteries11 was relied upon to 
show that even when the application was belatedly rejected 
on the ground that it was incomplete in certain respects, 
this Court held the deemed permission to be granted. 
7	
(2009) 1 SCC 180
8	
(2009) 15 SCC 705
9	
(1978) 4 SCC 224
10	
(2002) 2 SCC 578
11	
(2001) 10 SCC 74
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
445
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
vii.	 The 60-day time period provided for in the Act cannot be 
extended, including on the pretext of resubmission of the 
application for closure. There were two letters issued by 
the State authority, one on 25th September 2019 and the 
other on 4th November 2019, with the latter one being 
beyond the said time period. Thereafter were two further 
letters dated 20th and 22nd November 2019 directing 
their presence for a meeting, both clearly beyond the 
time limit. Further, it is said that there is no provision for 
resubmission. Permitting the same would unsettle the 
scheme of the law. 
viii.	 The Labour Minister is the “appropriate Government” within 
the meaning of the Act, hence all actions contemplated 
under Section 25-O could have been undertaken by 
him only. No further delegation thereof is provided for or 
permissible without notification to such effect under Section 
39 of the Act. Be that as it may, it has been held in Orissa 
Textile and Steel (supra) that sub-delegation of quasi 
judicial function is impermissible. No communication has 
been addressed by the ‘appropriate Government’ within 
the time frame. 
ix.	
The letter dated 25th September 2019 is by no means an 
order. Had it been so, there was no basis for the State’s 
further letters. In fact, letter dated 4th November 2019 
makes reference to the application for closure dated 
28th August 2019. Said letter was also not marked to the 
workmen/their representatives which is a requirement 
under Section 25-O(2). 
B.	
Respondents 
The Workers Union, namely the Maharashtra Rajya Rashtriya Kamgar 
Sangh (INTUC) has filed written submissions. Their stand is that the 
impugned judgment is justified and takes the correct interpretation 
of facts and law. It has been argued therein, inter alia, that :
i.	
The first response of the State to the closure application, 
i.e., letter dated 25th September 2019 is not within the 
sphere of challenge.
446
Supreme Court Reports
ii.	
The communication which took place regarding the alleged 
closure of HSML and Shangrila12 total approximately 300 
workers, and non-inclusion of their recognised union in 
such discussions is absolutely detrimental to the interests 
of these workers. 
iii.	
The intent of Section 25-O is to protect the fundamental 
rights of the employees, i.e., livelihood. The stand of the 
State is in consonance therewith, keeping in view important 
factors such as genuineness and adequacy of reasons.
iv.	
No question of law arises in the present matter which 
requires or would justify, the interference of this Court 
under its jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution 
of India. 
v.	
The deeming provision under Section 25-O(3) of the Act 
has to be read in continuation with Section 25-O(1) thereof. 
Since the employees were never informed of the enquiry 
as contemplated under Section 25-O(2) of the Act and 
the same never took place, closure cannot be deemed 
to have been granted thereunder. 
vi.	
The incompleteness of the applications was accepted by 
the appellants themselves since they produced additional 
reasons. Also, the argument of respondent No.1 that 
internal noting of the file being used to show that the 
file had not been delayed, has been adopted by the 
Respondent-Union.
vii.	
Since the learned Industrial Tribunal had granted stay on 
26th November 2019, and the writ petition subject matter of 
these appeals, was filed before the High Court on the same 
day, there has been no effective order of closure thus far. 
viii.	 The question of Respondent-State as to whether the 
workers could be accommodated in other ongoing concerns 
under the control of the HSML – was justified. None of the 
monetary proposals have been accepted by the workers 
as placed before the Court and so, they are entitled to full 
benefits of Section 25-O(6) of the Act. 
12	
Appellants in the connected SLP
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
447
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
ix.	
In furtherance of their submissions, reliance is placed on 
a judgment of the High Court of Judicature at Madras in 
Sree Meenakshi Textile Mills Ltd. v. Madurai Textile 
Workers Union (CITU) & Ors.13
QUESTIONS TO BE CONSIDERED 
6.	
Having heard the learned counsel at length and captured their 
submissions as above, the following questions would fall for our 
consideration :
A.	
Whether letter dated 25th September 2019 can be construed 
to be an order - Connectedly, whether the appellants would 
be entitled to the relief of deemed closure, as on 27th October 
2019 by virtue of the deeming fiction present in Section 25-
O(3) of the Act?
B.	
What would be the meaning of the phrase ‘appropriate 
Government’ and whether in the facts of this case, it was the 
appropriate Government acting in the matter of the closure - if 
not what is the effect in law, thereof?
ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 
7.	
At the outset, two aspects must be taken note of. One is that the 
Constitution of India under Article 19 provides for the freedom of 
trade, profession, occupation and business. Meaning thereby that 
all citizens of the country have freedom to choose a location of 
their choice and run it as they deem it fit, subject to the reasonable 
restrictions that may be made by the legislature. When it comes to 
industry which is covered under Article 19, the field of the statute 
is occupied by the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. As such, its scope 
must be set out. 
First
In Cooverjee B. Bharucha v. Excise Commr.14, a Bench of five 
learned Judges, while dismissing an application under article 32 
of the Constitution of India arising from the grant of license to sell 
13	
1979 (38) FLR 213
14	
(1954) 1 SCC 18 
448
Supreme Court Reports
country liquor to a person, allegedly in contravention of the Rules 
set out for such purpose, i.e., in a manner, which according to the 
petitioner, violated his right under Article 19(1)(g), held :
“7. Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution guarantees that all 
citizens have the right to practise any profession or to carry 
on any occupation or trade or business, and sub-section 
(6) of the Article authorises legislation which imposes 
reasonable restrictions on this right in the interests of the 
general public. It was not disputed that in order to determine 
the reasonableness of the restriction regard must be had 
to the nature of the business and the conditions prevailing 
in that trade. It is obvious that these factors must differ 
from trade to trade and no hard-and-fast rules concerning 
all trades can be laid down. It can also not be denied that 
the State has the power to prohibit trades which are illegal 
or immoral or injurious to the health and welfare of the 
public. Laws prohibiting trades in noxious or dangerous 
goods or trafficking in women cannot be held to be illegal 
as enacting a prohibition and not a mere regulation. The 
nature of the business is, therefore, an important element 
in deciding the reasonableness of the restrictions. The right 
of every citizen to pursue any lawful trade or business is 
obviously subject to such reasonable conditions as may 
be deemed by the governing authority of the country 
essential to the safety, health, peace, order and morals 
of the community…”
Second
A Constitution Bench of this Court in Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. v. 
Workmen15 held as below noting the object of industrial law : 
“9. At the outset, it will be convenient to consider the 
question of principle. The object of the industrial law is 
two-fold, namely, (i) to improve the service conditions of 
industrial labour so as to provide for them the ordinary 
amenities of life, and (ii) by that process, to bring about 
industrial peace which would in its turn accelerate 
15	
1966 SCC OnLine SC 106
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
449
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
productive activity of the country resulting in its prosperity. 
The prosperity of the country, in its turn, helps to improve 
the conditions of labour.” 
This Court in Ajaib Singh v. Sirhind Coop. Marketing-cum-
Processing Service Society Ltd.16, in the paragraphs extracted 
below, discusses the intent of the legislation and its history, in the 
following terms :
“5. ...The Act is intended not only to make provision for 
investigation and settlement of industrial disputes but 
also to serve industrial peace so that it may result in 
more production and improve the national economy. In 
the present socio-political economic system, it is intended 
to achieve cooperation between the capital and labour 
which has been deemed to be essential for maintenance 
of increased production and industrial peace. The Act 
provides to ensure fair terms to workmen and to prevent 
disputes between the employer and the employees so 
that the large interests of the public may not suffer. The 
provisions of the Act have to be interpreted in a manner 
which advances the object of the legislature contemplated 
in the Statement of Objects and Reasons. While interpreting 
different provisions of the Act, attempt should be made 
to avoid industrial unrest, secure industrial peace and 
to provide machinery to secure the end. Conciliation is 
the most important and desirable way to secure that 
end. In dealing with industrial disputes, the courts have 
always emphasized the doctrine of social justice, which 
is founded on the basic ideal of socio-economic equality 
as enshrined in the Preamble of our Constitution. While 
construing the provisions of the Act, the courts have to 
give them a construction which should help in achieving 
the object of the Act.
6. The history of the legislation with respect to the industrial 
disputes would show that for the first time in the year 1920 
the Trade Disputes Act was enacted which provided for 
courts of enquiry and Conciliation Boards and forbade 
16	
(1999) 6 SCC 82
450
Supreme Court Reports
strikes in public utility service without a statutory notice in 
writing. The Act did not make provision for any machinery for 
settling of industrial disputes. The said Act was repealed and 
replaced by the Trade Disputes Act, 1929 which started the 
State intervention in the settlement of industrial disputes and 
armed the Government with the power which could be used 
whenever considered fit to intervene in industrial disputes. 
This Act was amended in the year 1938 authorising the 
Central and Provincial Governments to appoint Conciliation 
Officers for mediating in or promoting the settlement of 
industrial disputes. Shortly thereafter the Government of 
India promulgated the Defence of India Rules to meet the 
exigency created by the Second World War. Rule 81-A 
gave powers to the Government to intervene in industrial 
disputes and was intended to provide speedy remedies 
for industrial disputes by referring them compulsorily to 
conciliation or adjudication by making the awards legally 
binding on the parties and by prohibiting strikes or lockouts 
during the pendency of the conciliation or adjudication 
proceedings. The Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) 
Act, 1946 was enacted which made provision for framing 
and certifying of standing orders covering various aspects 
of service conditions in the industry. The Industrial Disputes 
Bill was introduced in the Central Legislative Assembly 
on 8-10-1945 which embodied the essential principles of 
Rule 81-A of the Defence of India Rules and also certain 
provisions of the Trade Disputes Act, 1929 concerning 
industrial disputes. The Bill was passed by the Assembly 
in March 1947 and became the law w.e.f. 1-4-1947. The 
present Act was enacted with the objects as referred to 
hereinabove and provided machinery and forum for the 
investigation of industrial disputes, their settlement for 
purposes analogous and incidental thereto. The emergence 
of the concept of a welfare State implies an end to the 
exploitation of workmen and as a corollary to that collective 
bargaining came into its own. The legislature had intended 
to protect workmen against victimisation and exploitation by 
the employer and to ensure termination of industrial disputes 
in a peaceful manner. The object of the Act, therefore, is 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
451
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
to give succour to weaker sections of society which is a 
prerequisite for a welfare State. To ensure industrial peace 
and pre-empt industrial tension, the Act further aims at 
enhancing the industrial production which is acknowledged 
to be the lifeblood of a developing society. The Act provides 
a machinery for investigation and settlement of industrial 
disputes ignoring the legal technicalities with a view to 
avoid delays, by specially authorised courts which are not 
supposed to deny the relief on account of the procedural 
wrangles. The Act contemplates realistic and effective 
negotiations, conciliation and adjudication as per the need 
of society keeping in view the fast-changing social norms 
of a developing country like India. It appears to us that the 
High Court has adopted a casual approach in deciding the 
matter apparently ignoring the purpose, aim and object of 
the Act.”
8.	
Since both the questions that arise for our consideration are 
intertwined, they shall be taken up together. The instant dispute 
pertains to the closure of HSML and Shangrila, industrial units 
engaged in manufacturing for BIL. Section 25-O of the Act deals with 
this situation. The extract as it relates to the dispute herein, reads :
“[25-O. Procedure for closing down an undertaking.—
(1) An employer who intends to close down an undertaking 
of an industrial establishment to which this Chapter 
applies shall, in the prescribed manner, apply, for prior 
permission at least ninety days before the date on which the 
intended closure is to become effective, to the appropriate 
Government, stating clearly the reasons for the intended 
closure of the undertaking and a copy of such application 
shall also be served simultaneously on the representatives 
of the workmen in the prescribed manner: Provided that 
nothing in this sub-section shall apply to an undertaking 
set up for the construction of buildings, bridges, roads, 
canals, dams or for other construction work. 
(2) Where an application for permission has been made 
under sub-section (1), the appropriate Government, after 
making such enquiry as it thinks fit and after giving a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard to the employer, 
452
Supreme Court Reports
the workmen and the persons interested in such closure 
may, having regard to the genuineness and adequacy of 
the reasons stated by the employer, the interests of the 
general public and all other relevant factors, by order and 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, grant or refused to 
grant such permission and a copy of such order shall be 
communicated to the employer and the workmen. 
(3) Where an application has been made under sub-
section  (1) and the appropriate Government does not 
communicate the order granting or refusing to grant 
permission to the employer within a period of sixty days 
from the date on which such application is made, the 
permission applied for shall be deemed to have been 
granted on the expiration of the said period of sixty days.
…”
9.	
Sub-section 1 states that an employer who wants to close down 
his business concern must, write to the concerned ‘appropriate 
Government’-
(a)	 at least 90 days before the date of intended closure;
(b)	 stating reasons for such closure;
(c)	
undertaking that the copy of this application has been served 
on the representatives of the workmen.
As per sub-section (2), the appropriate is to,
(a)	 Making a suitable enquiry; 
(b)	 After providing a reasonable opportunity of hearing to the 
employer, the workmen and those interested in the closure of 
such business;
(c)	
And considering the genuineness, adequacy of reasons, 
interests of the general public & all other relevant factors; 
by an order in writing, recording reasons, grant or refuse 
such permission. Such an order is to be communicated to the 
employer and the workmen. 
Sub-section (3) deems the grant of permission for closure as 
requested if the appropriate Government does not, within sixty days 
of the application, make an order. 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
453
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
10.	 If there exists the freedom to set up and run a trade/business as one 
sees fit, necessarily, there has to be a set of rights vesting with the 
proprietor/owner to take decisions as may be in his best interest. At 
the same time, it is true that the law does not permit such owner or 
proprietor to take any and all decisions without having considered 
and accounted for the impact that it shall have on the employees 
or workers that are part of this establishment. This is evidenced by 
the provision extracted above providing for a detailed procedure to 
be followed when a person wishes to ‘shut shop’, but concomitant 
providing that if the concerned Government does not take action with 
reasonable expediency, the business owner should not be saddled 
with the costs and responsibilities of running the business indefinitely, 
till such time the authority arrives at a proper and just decision. The 
sum and substance are that Article 19(1)(g) includes the right to shut 
down a business but is, of course, subject to reasonable restrictions. 
This interplay of Article 19(1)(g) and Section 25-O of the Act engaged 
in the attention of a Constitution Bench of this Court in Excel Wear 
(supra), when it was cast with considering the constitutionality of 
Section 25-O as it then stood. It has subsequently been amended, 
challenged before this Court and upheld in Orissa Textile and Steel 
(supra), which we will discuss further ahead.
11.	 In Excel Wear (supra), N.L Untwalia, J., writing for the Court made 
some pertinent observations which we see fit to reproduce with profit : 
“20… But then, as pointed out by this Court in Hatisingh 
case the right to close down a business is an integral 
part of the right to carry it on. It is not quite correct to say 
that a right to close down a business can be equated or 
placed at par as high as the right not to start and carry 
on a business at all. The extreme proposition urged on 
behalf of the employers by equating the two rights and 
placing them at par is not quite apposite and sound. 
Equally so, or rather, more emphatically we do reject the 
extreme contention put forward on behalf of the Labour 
Unions that right to close down a business is not an 
integral part of the right to carry on a business, but it is a 
right appurtenant to the ownership of the property or that 
it is not a fundamental right at all. It is wrong to say that 
an employer has no right to close down a business once 
he starts it. If he has such a right, as obviously he has, it 
454
Supreme Court Reports
cannot but be a fundamental right embedded in the right 
to carry on any business guaranteed under Article 19(1)
(g) of the Constitution.”
12.	 A Constitution Bench in Orissa Textiles (supra) through Variava J., 
observed as follows about the current iteration of Section 25-O :
“18. We also see no substance in the contention that the 
amended section merely deals with the procedural defects 
pointed out in  Excel Wear case  [(1978) 4 SCC 224 : 
1978 SCC (L&S) 509 : (1979) 1 SCR 1009] and does not 
deal with the substantive grounds set out in Excel Wear 
case [(1978) 4 SCC 224 : 1978 SCC (L&S) 509 : (1979) 
1 SCR 1009] . In our view the amended Section 25-O 
is very different from Section 25-O (as it then stood). It 
is now more akin to Section 25-N (as it then stood) the 
constitutional validity of which was upheld in Meenakshi 
Mills case [(1992) 3 SCC 336 : 1992 SCC (L&S) 679] . 
In Excel Wear case [(1978) 4 SCC 224 : 1978 SCC (L&S) 
509 : (1979) 1 SCR 1009] it has been accepted that 
reasonable restrictions could be placed under Article 19(6) 
of the Constitution. Excel Wear case [(1978) 4 SCC 224 
: 1978 SCC (L&S) 509 : (1979) 1 SCR 1009] recognizes 
that in the interest of general public it is possible to restrict, 
for a limited period of time, the right to close down the 
business. The amended Section 25-O lays down guidelines 
which are to be followed by the appropriate government 
in granting or refusing permission to close down. It has 
to have regard to the genuineness and adequacy of the 
reasons stated by the employer. However, merely because 
the reasons are genuine and adequate cannot mean that 
permission to close must necessarily be granted. There 
could be cases where the interest of general public may 
require that no closure takes place. Undoubtedly where 
the reasons are genuine and adequate the interest of 
the general public must be of a compelling or overriding 
nature. Thus, by way of examples, if an industry is engaged 
in manufacturing of items required for defence of the 
country, then even though the reasons may be genuine 
and adequate it may become necessary, in the interest 
of the general public, not to allow closure for some time. 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
455
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
Similarly, if the establishment is manufacturing vaccines or 
drugs for an epidemic which is prevalent at that particular 
point of time, interest of the general public may require 
not to allow closure for a particular period of time. We 
must also take a note of sub-section (7) of the amended 
Section 25-O which provides that if there are exceptional 
circumstances or accident in the undertaking or death 
of the employer or the like, the appropriate government 
could direct that provision of sub-section (1) would not 
apply to such an undertaking. This, in our view, makes it 
clear that the amended Section 25-O recognizes that if 
there are exceptional circumstances then there could be 
no compulsion to continue to run the business. It must 
however be clarified that this Court is not laying down 
that some difficulty or financial hardship in running the 
establishment would be sufficient. The employer must 
show that it has become impossible to continue to run 
the establishment. Looked at from this point of view, in 
our view, the restrictions imposed are reasonable and in 
the interest of the general public.”
(Emphasis supplied)
13.	 What can be deduced regarding the scope of section 25-O from the 
above extract is –
i.	
the right to close the business is subject to the interest of the 
general public;
ii.	
any application seeking permission for closure must disclose 
adequate and genuine reasons which the authority has to have 
regard for;
iii.	
in certain cases, however, even if the reasons are genuine and 
adequate, it does not mean that permission to close ought to 
be granted;
iv.	
if it is found that the reasons are generally adequate, and 
despite that the appropriate Government decides for refusal 
of permission of foreclosure, then the interest of the general 
public involved in that particular case must be “compelling” 
and “overriding”;
456
Supreme Court Reports
v.	
financial difficulty on its own cannot constitute the reason for 
shutting down the business. An employer must demonstrate 
exceptional circumstances or an impossibility of running the 
business.
14.	 In the instant facts, the application for closure was duly addressed to 
the authority, which was acknowledged to be on 28 August 2019. The 
Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Labour Government of Maharashtra, 
responded on 25 September 2019 stating that no sufficient reasons 
had been provided for closure. The letter read- “it will be possible to 
take action only if you can submit the application again by providing 
explanation regarding other efforts initiated by you for not closing 
down the Division, providing justifiable as well as consummate 
rationale for this action.” Hereby, it was informed that action could 
not be taken on the application as it stood and that they would have 
to resubmit with better particulars. 
15.	 It is contended by HSML that the Deputy Secretary made such an 
order without the requisite authority since he was not the “appropriate 
Government” to deal with applications under section 25-O. As such, 
the order to revise and resubmit would be non-est in law. It is an 
undisputed position, as also noted by the High Court, that the powers 
under section 25-O rest with the Minister. There is no difficulty in that 
respect. The State Government, being the appropriate Government, 
has delegated its power specifically to the Minister for Labour. Section 
39 of the Act provides for such a situation. It reads :
“39. Delegation of powers.- The appropriate Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 
any power exercisable by it under this Act or rules made 
thereunder shall, in relation to such matters and subject 
to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
direction, be exercisable also,--
(a) where the appropriate Government is Central 
Government, by such officer or authority subordinate to 
the Central Government or by the State Government, 
or by such officer or authority subordinate to the State 
Government, as may be specified in the notification; and 
(b) where the appropriate Government is a State 
Government by such officer or authority subordinate to the 
State Government as may be specified in the notification.”
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
457
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
There is nothing on record to show that the Deputy Secretary has 
been duly authorised to conduct communication and/or accept or 
reject applications for closure made by industrial units. The concerned 
authority in that regard is only the Minister. If it is considered that 
the Minister for Labour himself represents the State Government or 
is merely an agent of the State Government, then for the Deputy 
Secretary to act, there ought to have been a notification in that 
respect. Otherwise, if the Minister for Labour is a delegate of the 
State Government, then there has to be a notification therefor as 
well. According to the impugned judgment, a notification to this effect 
dated 25 June 2013 is present. However, the same is not on record. 
The Respondent-State has contended that the internal noting placed 
on record before the High Court shows that the file had travelled 
up to the Minister, and, therefore, any action consequent to such 
approval by the Minister is in accordance with the law.
16.	 We find it difficult to accept this contention for two reasons. There is 
no express authority resting with the Deputy Secretary. This we have 
already observed. Second, reliance cannot be placed on internal 
noting to establish compliance with procedure. This Court in Pimpri 
Chinchwad New Township Development Authority v. Vishnudev 
Coop. Housing Society17, in a case pertaining to proceedings under 
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 concerning the issue of whether the 
State is at liberty to withdraw from an acquisition, held “ …a mere 
noting in the official files of the Government while dealing with any 
matter pertaining to any person is essentially an internal matter of 
the Government and carries with it no legal sanctity;…”. [Also see 
Bachhittar Singh (supra); Sethi Auto Services Station (supra); 
and Shanti Sports Club (supra)]. 
Hypothetically, assuming that the letter dated 25 September 2019 
was sent to HSML with the approval of the Minister, as allegedly 
shown by the internal noting in the office file, and was thereby issued 
by the competent authority, even in that case, we find the ‘order’ 
to be lacking. The order accepting or rejecting an application for 
closure is undoubtedly an administrative order. It is noted that the file 
originated from the desk officer and travelled up through the desks 
of various authorities and made its way to the Minister. One of these 
17	
(2018) 8 SCC 215 
458
Supreme Court Reports
authorities, it is unclear which one made the noting that the closure 
application did not disclose cogent reasons. The Minister endorsed 
this finding and noted in the file that they should be asked to submit 
the application afresh. This is tried to be shown as a decision of the 
Minister. For the competent authority to take a decision, as the law 
understands it, there has to be ‘application of mind’. The question 
that needs to be addressed is whether endorsement of a noting made 
by a subordinate officer can be ‘application of mind’. To show the 
same, it is generally prudent that reasons are recorded. In decades 
past, there was a belief that the Government would be brought to a 
standstill if it had to provide reasons for each administrative action, 
keeping in view the fact that it functions through a myriad of agencies 
and authorities18. Even here, it was stated that when such a decision 
affects the rights of parties, reasons should be accorded. It may 
be observed here that Section 25-O specifically provides “by order 
and for reasons to be recorded in writing,” and so, reasons are a 
statutory necessity. With time, it is now settled that administrative 
authorities are also required to give reasons for a decision made. In 
Star Enterprises v. City and Industrial Development Corpn. of 
Maharashtra Ltd.19, a three-Judge Bench in the context of tenders 
invited by a corporation which is ‘State’ within the meaning of Article 
12 of the Constitution of India, held as follows in regard to giving 
reasons for its decisions:
“10. In recent times, judicial review of administrative action 
has become expansive and is becoming wider day by 
day. The traditional limitations have been vanishing and 
the sphere of judicial scrutiny is being expanded. State 
activity too is becoming fast pervasive. As the State has 
descended into the commercial field and giant public 
sector undertakings have grown up, the stake of the public 
exchequer is also large justifying larger social audit, judicial 
control and review by opening of the public gaze; these 
necessitate recording of reasons for executive actions 
including cases of rejection of highest offers. That very 
often involves large stakes and availability of reasons 
for actions on the record assures credibility to the action; 
18	
Mahabir Jute Mills Ltd. v. Shibban Lal Saxena, (1975) 2 SCC 818
19	
(1990) 3 SCC 280 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
459
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
disciplines public conduct and improves the culture of 
accountability. Looking for reasons in support of such 
action provides an opportunity for an objective review in 
appropriate cases both by the administrative superior and 
by the judicial process. The submission of Mr. Dwivedi, 
therefore, commends itself to our acceptance, namely, that 
when highest offers of the type in question are rejected 
reasons sufficient to indicate the stand of the appropriate 
authority should be made available and ordinarily the same 
should be communicated to the concerned parties unless 
there be any specific justification not to do so.”
(Emphasis Supplied)
Reasons, therefore, are important and ought to be recorded. It could 
be said that the conclusion reached by the office of the Minister that 
HSML had not supplied sufficient reasons for closure would itself 
be sufficient to qualify as ‘reasons’. However, can an endorsement 
of the view taken by an undisclosed officer of the Ministry be said 
to be an ‘application of mind’ by the competent authority when the 
Minister is the sole authority? We think not. The decision had to 
be Top Down and not otherwise. Had it been that this conclusion 
of insufficiency of reasons was the Minister’s conclusion, and then 
they would have directed the Deputy Secretary to communicate the 
decision to HSML, then our conclusion may have been different.
17.	 Given the above discussion, the necessary conclusion is that the 
letter dated 25 September 2019 addressed by the Deputy Secretary 
to HSML cannot be constituted to be an order since such order to 
resubmit the application was without any authority since it was not 
the appropriate Government acting in that regard and not an order 
rejecting or accepting the application. The same conclusion can be 
reached on a second count - the ‘order’ suffered from the vice of 
non-application of mind by the competent authority. 
18.	 Section 25-O provides that the appropriate Government may, after 
making an enquiry and hearing all the concerned parties, pass an 
order in writing accepting or rejecting the application for closure. It also 
provides that if the appropriate Government does not communicate 
and order within 60 days of the date of application, there shall be 
deemed closure. We have held that the appropriate Government 
had not acted in respect of the application made by HSML since the 
460
Supreme Court Reports
Minister, who was the competent authority, had not applied his mind 
to the administrative ‘order’ nor, did the Deputy Secretary have the 
authority to do so. In other words, the appropriate Government failed 
to make and communicate any order on the application for closure. 
The deemed closure would, therefore, come into effect.
19.	 Separately, we may observe that the reasoning furnished by the 
Deputy Secretary to reject the application for closure made by 
HSML is insufficient, and it appears to have been given for the sole 
purpose of rejecting the application without due application of mind. 
As discussed supra, an employer seeking to close his business must 
show compelling and overriding circumstances. The application for 
closure clearly states, as already reproduced supra that “Thus BIL 
has terminated the job work agreement with the Biscuit Division 
and the said provision has no other manufacturing avenue, since 
the said Division was manufacturing biscuits only for BIL. In view 
of the above, the biscuit division has no alternative but to close 
down, the manufacturing activities.”. We may add HSMC to have 
clarified that since inception no job work for anyone else was ever 
done and that now there is no further scope of executing work for 
anyone else. We are quite certain that this spells impossibility. It is 
not the case of the Respondent-State that the statement made by 
HSML is incorrect and that they had other opportunities ongoing 
and available, and despite the same, they had sought permission 
for closure. Then, we ask ourselves, when there is no opportunity 
or avenue for production, what shall the employees do?
20.	 Arguendo, if we keep aside the 60-day time period for the deemed 
closure to take effect, we find that in the subsequent letter dated 10 
October 2019, the position stands further clarified that for the last 32 
years, HSML undertook work only from BIL and in doing so, the raw 
material and necessary plant and machinery were provided by the 
latter itself. Upon receipt of the notice of closure, in an attempt to 
save the division, they tried to persuade BIL to reconsider its decision 
but were not met with success. They subsequently approached 
other companies seeking manufacturing work, but to no avail. In the 
attending facts and circumstances, we hold that there did indeed 
exist sufficient compelling circumstances for closure.
21.	 The High Court, in our considered view, erred in placing reliance on 
Form XXIV-B, instead of XXIV-C which, resulted into an erroneous 
appreciation of statutory provisions. 
[2025] 7 S.C.R. 
461
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. (Biscuit Division) & Anr. v.  
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
CONCLUSION
22.	 In that view of the matter, we hold that application dated 28th August 
2019 was complete in all respects, and the 60-day period for the 
deemed closure to take effect would be calculable from said date. 
Second, the Deputy Secretary was not the appropriate Government 
who could have asked HSML to revise and resubmit the application 
for closure. That authority is only vested with the Minister concerned. 
The Minister did not, even in the slightest, consider the merits of the 
matter independently, much less with or without any application of 
mind. Sub-delegation to the officer was not permitted by law, and, 
therefore, any communication made by him would be without any 
legal sanction.
23.	 The appeals are allowed. It is, however, clarified that the money paid 
to the employees by orders of the High Court in the pendency of the 
writ petitions would not be recoverable from them. At this juncture, 
we may refer to the order made by this Court preserving the matter 
for judgment. It was recorded therein as follows :
“O R D E R
…
5. Shri Rohatgi, learned senior counsel, on instructions, 
states that a sum of Rs.4 Crores (approximately) already 
stands deposited. In addition, a further sum of Rs.10 crores 
can be paid by the petitioner to the respondent workmen. 
He clarifies that the said amount would be in addition to 
the amount of gratuity (approximately Rs.4 crores) which 
the workmen are otherwise entitled to.
6. The entire sum, i.e., the amount of gratuity plus the 
enhanced amount can be distributed as compensation 
amongst the workmen who may be eligible and entitled 
to, for being on the rolls of the company. 
7. This, of course, is by way of an endeavour to put an end 
to the controversy and without prejudice to the respective 
rights and contentions of the parties.” 
24.	 Considering that some of the employees may be, with the closure of 
this concern, losing the only job they have known and still others would 
be, for no fault of their own, rendered unemployed, we appreciate 
462
Supreme Court Reports
the gesture made by HSML. Such a statement is taken on record. At 
the close of the hearing, Mr. Mukul Rohtagi, learned Senior Counsel 
had left the issue of further enhancement of the amount to the Court. 
Having given thoughtful consideration, we deem it just and proper 
to further enhancing the appellants’ offer by a sum of Rs.5 crores, 
thus, making it Rs.15 Crores instead of Rs.10 Crores, as mentioned 
in our order extracted supra. Let the amount be released forthwith, 
as per their entitlement, in favour of the employees and, in any case, 
not later than eight weeks from the date of the judgment.
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan