[2025] 8 S.C.R. 345 : 2025 INSC 922
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited 
v. 
Green Infra Corporate Wind Private Limited  
and Others Etc.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 14098-14101 of 2015)
04 August 2025
[Sanjay Kumar* and Satish Chandra Sharma, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the four respondent companies were entitled to 
approach the Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission (GERC) 
for determination of the tariff for procurement of power by  
Appellant-GUVNL from their wind energy projects.
Headnotes†
Electricity Act, 2003 – ss.61, 62, 64, 86 – Income Tax Act, 1961 – 
s.32 – Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) entered into between 
GUVNL and the respondent companies containing a clause w.r.t 
the tariff applicable for purchase of power from the respondent 
companies’ wind energy projects – Respondent companies 
approached the GERC seeking project-wise determination of 
tariff, claiming that they had not availed accelerated depreciation 
under the Income Tax Act, 1961 – Claim contested by GUVNL, 
arguing that they had willingly entered into PPAs and were 
bound to the tariff rate of ₹3.56 per kWh, and therefore, could 
not seek determination of tariff on a case-to-case basis – GERC 
decided the issue in favour of respondent companies – Order 
confirmed by the APTEL – Correctness:
Held: GUVNL, an instrumentality of the State is bound to promote 
and give effect to the Government’s policy of encouraging generation 
of power from renewable energy sources – When the Government 
promulgated a policy in that regard, offering various incentives to 
wind energy projects, GUVNL cannot act contrary thereto by fixing a 
tariff for purchase of power from such wind energy projects contrary 
to the mandate of Order dated 30.01.2010 issued by GERC as per 
which the tariff of ₹3.56 per kWh was applicable only to those wind 
energy projects that availed the benefit of accelerated depreciation – 
* Author
346
Supreme Court Reports
It is not disputed that the four respondent companies did not avail 
such benefit – Thus, the question of applying to them the tariff that 
was only meant for wind energy projects that did avail accelerated 
depreciation would not arise – GUVNL cannot be guided only by 
its own commercial interests, like a private business entity and it’s 
conduct, as a State instrumentality, must be of the standard of a 
model citizen – It cannot contend that the respondent companies are 
estopped from seeking determination of tariff by the GERC as they 
had willingly signed PPAs with it at the tariff fixed for wind energy 
projects availing accelerated depreciation – As GUVNL failed to 
obtain commitments from the respondent companies that they would 
only avail accelerated depreciation at the time they had to choose 
that option, GUVNL has no indefeasible right to bind them to a tariff 
which was applicable only to such wind energy projects that availed 
accelerated depreciation – Orders passed by the GERC and the 
APTEL not interfered with – Income Tax Rules, 1962. [Paras 24, 25]
Case Law Cited
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v. Tarini Infrastructure Limited 
and Others [2016] 5 SCR 990 : (2016) 8 SCC 743 – relied on.
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v. EMCO Limited and Another 
[2016] 1 SCR 857 : (2016) 11 SCC 182 – referred to.
List of Acts
Electricity Act, 2003; Income Tax Act, 1961; Income Tax Rules, 1962.
List of Keywords
Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission (GERC); Determination 
of the tariff; Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited (GUVNL); 
Procurement of power by GUVNL; Wind energy projects; 
Accelerated Depreciation; Procurement of power by distribution 
licensees; Project-wise determination of tariff; Determination of tariff 
on a case to case basis; Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (APTEL); 
Instrumentality of the State; State instrumentality; Renewable 
energy sources; Generation of power from renewable energy 
sources; Wind power, Solar power; National Electricity Policy; 
National Electricity Policy and Plan; Tariff policy; Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy; Government of Gujarat; Wind Power Policy 
2007; Non-conventional renewable energy; Normal depreciation; 
Gujarat Energy Development Agency (GEDA).
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
347
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v.  
Green Infra Corporate Wind Private Limited and Others Etc.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 14098-
14101 of 2015
From the Judgment and Order dated 28.09.2015 of the Appellate 
Tribunal for Electricity at New Delhi in FA No. 198, 199, 200 and 
291 of 2014
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
C A Sundaram, Mr Ramachandran, Sr. Advs., Ms. Hemantika Wahi, 
Ms. Ranjitha Ramachandran, Ms. Jesal Wahi, Ms. Srishti Khindaria.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Sanjay Sen, Shyam Divan, Sr. Adv., Vishal Gupta, Anupam 
Chaudhary, Sarthak Garg, Shri Venkatesh, Ms. Kanika Chugh, 
Ashutosh Kumar Srivastava, Shryeshth Ramesh Sharma, Siddharth 
Nigotia, Harsh Vardhan, Nitin Saluja, Divyakant Lahoti, Akshaya 
Babu, Ms. Praveena Bisht, Siddharth Tripathi, Rongon Choudhary.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Kumar, J.
1.	
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited (GUVNL), the appellant in these 
four appeals, assails the common judgment dated 28.09.2015 
rendered by the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity (APTEL), New Delhi, 
in Appeal Nos. 198, 199, 200 and 291 of 2014. Thereby, the APTEL 
confirmed the orders dated 13.06.2014, 11.06.2014, 13.06.2014 and 
20.09.2014 passed by the Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(GERC), Gandhi Nagar, in Petition Nos. 1239 of 2012, 1221 of 2012, 
1241 of 2012 and 1365 of 2013 filed by Green Infra Corporate Wind 
Private Limited, New Delhi; Vaayu (India) Power Corporation Private 
Limited, Daman; Green Infra Wind Power Limited, New Delhi; and 
Tadas Wind Energy Private Limited, Mumbai, respectively, viz., the 
four contesting respondent companies.
2.	
By order dated 05.05.2016, this Court requested the GERC to defer 
its proceedings till the matter was finally decided and disposed of by 
348
Supreme Court Reports
this Court. This order was passed in view of the fact that, pursuant 
to the APTEL’s common judgment under appeal, the GERC began 
hearings for determination of tariff on the petitions filed by each of the 
four respondent companies. Thereafter, by order dated 03.02.2023, 
this Court permitted the GERC to proceed with the tariff determination 
hearings subject to the condition that no final order should be passed 
without the leave of this Court. We are informed that the hearings 
before the GERC have concluded but the final orders have not been 
pronounced owing to the aforestated order. 
3.	
The short issue for consideration is whether the four respondent 
companies were entitled to approach the GERC for determination of 
the tariff for procurement of power by GUVNL from their wind energy 
projects. The GERC answered this issue in their favour and the same 
stood confirmed by the APTEL. Hence, these statutory appeals. 
4.	
By Order No. 1 of 2010 dated 30.01.2010, passed in exercise of 
the powers conferred by Sections 61(h), 62(1)(a) and 86(1)(e) of 
the Electricity Act, 2003 (for brevity, ‘the Act of 2003’), the GERC 
determined the tariff for procurement of power by distribution 
licensees, such as GUVNL, from wind energy projects. This order was 
applicable for a control period of 3 years with effect from 11.08.2009. 
In consequence, all wind energy projects commissioned during 
that 3-year control period were covered by this order. One of the 
factors considered by the GERC for tariff determination thereunder 
is ‘Depreciation’. In relation thereto, GUVNL and others had pointed 
out that some of the wind energy projects availed the benefit of 
‘Accelerated Depreciation’ as a tax-planning measure and if the same 
is taken into account, the tariff would reduce drastically, i.e., to about 
₹3.05 per unit, but if it is not taken into account, the tariff would be 
higher, working out to ₹3.77 per unit. They, therefore, suggested 
that the GERC should specify either an average tariff of ₹3.50 per 
unit or two different tariffs for wind energy projects - (i) those which 
are availing the benefit of accelerated depreciation; and (ii) those 
which are not availing the benefit of accelerated depreciation. They 
also suggested that the wind energy projects which did not avail 
accelerated depreciation benefit should be asked to submit affidavits 
along with supporting documents that accelerated depreciation was 
not being claimed by them. Upon considering these objections/
suggestions, the GERC ruled as follows: - 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
349
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v.  
Green Infra Corporate Wind Private Limited and Others Etc.
‘Commission’s Ruling
Depreciation is a non-cash flow expenditure and it is linked 
with the loan repayment. The loan repayment period is 
considered by the Commission as 10 years. Hence, the 
requirement of cash flow in the initial 10 years is more 
to match with the loan repayment. After considering the 
suggestions of the objectors, the Commission decided to 
allow 6% of the capital cost per annum as depreciation 
for the initial 10 years and 2% per annum from 11th to 25th 
year of the plant.
The provisions of Accelerated Depreciation are provided in 
the Income Tax Act, 1961 and Rules framed thereunder. A 
person who qualifies under the above statutory provisions 
is entitled to get benefits of the Accelerated Depreciation. 
Hence, the Commission decides to determine the tariff 
taking into account the benefit of accelerated depreciation 
available under Income Tax Act, 1961 and Rules framed 
under it. Those who do not avail of such benefit may 
submit petitions on case-to-case basis.’
5.	
In effect, the GERC made it clear that those wind energy projects 
which did not avail the benefit of accelerated depreciation under the 
Income-Tax Act, 1961 (for brevity, ‘the Act of 1961’), were entitled 
to approach it on a case-to-case basis for determination of tariff for 
the power supplied by them to distribution licensees. As regards 
those wind energy projects which did avail accelerated depreciation, 
the GERC took into consideration various factors and determined 
the levelized tariff for wind energy generation at ₹3.56 per kWh 
(Kilowatt-hour), a much higher tariff than that suggested by GUVNL. 
The GERC also made it clear that the said tariff took into account 
the benefit of accelerated depreciation under the Act of 1961 and 
the Rules made thereunder and again reiterated that for a project 
which did not get such benefit, the GERC would, on a petition filed 
in that respect, determine a separate tariff taking into account all the 
relevant facts. The GERC further clarified that the tariff determined 
at ₹3.56 (constant) was applicable for the entire project life of 25 
years, i.e., from the 1st year to the 25th year, in the case of wind 
energy projects which availed accelerated depreciation.
350
Supreme Court Reports
6.	
Section 32 of the Act of 1961 deals with depreciation of buildings, 
machinery, plant or furniture, being tangible assets. Section 32(1) 
provides that in the case of assets of an undertaking engaged in 
generation or generation and distribution of power, such percentage 
on the actual cost thereof would be allowed as depreciation to the 
assessee, as may be prescribed. Rule 5 of the Income-Tax Rules, 
1962 (for brevity, ‘the Rules of 1962’), deals with depreciation. Rules 
5(1) and 5(1A) read thus: -
‘(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), the allowance 
under clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 32 in respect 
of depreciation of any block of assets shall be calculated 
at the percentages specified in the second column of the 
Table in Appendix I to these rules on the written down 
value of such block of assets as are used for the purposes 
of the business or profession of the assessee at any time 
during the previous year:
(1A) The allowance under clause (i) of sub-section (1) 
of section 32 of the Act in respect of depreciation of 
assets acquired on or after 1st day of April, 1997 shall 
be calculated at the percentage specified in the second 
column of the Table in Appendix IA of these rules on the 
actual cost thereof to the assessee as are used for the 
purposes of the business of the assessee at any time 
during the previous year:….’
The second and third provisos thereunder are of relevance insofar 
as ‘Accelerated Depreciation’ is concerned. The provisos read as 
follows: -
‘Provided further that the undertaking specified in clause 
(i) of sub-section (1) of section 32 of the Act may, instead 
of the depreciation specified in Appendix I-A, at its option, 
be allowed depreciation under sub-rule (1) read with 
Appendix I, if such option is exercised before the due date 
for furnishing the return of income under sub-section (1) 
of section 139 of the Act,
(a)	 for the assessment year 1998-99, in the case of an 
undertaking which began to generate power prior to 
1st day of April, 1997; and
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
351
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v.  
Green Infra Corporate Wind Private Limited and Others Etc.
(b)	 for the assessment year relevant to the previous year 
in which it begins to generate power, in case of any 
other undertaking:
Provided also that any such option once exercised shall 
be final and shall apply to all the subsequent assessment 
years.’
7.	
Appendix I to the Rules of 1962 provides that, insofar as ‘Renewable 
energy devices’ are concerned, the rate of accelerated depreciation 
effective from Assessment Year 2006-2007 would be 80%. Wind mills 
and specially designed devices which run on wind mills are classified 
as ‘Renewable energy devices’ thereunder. Thus, if a wind energy 
project which began power generation after 01.04.1997 wishes to 
avail acceleration depreciation of 80%, as aforestated, it is required 
to exercise such option before the due date for furnishing its return 
of income for the Assessment Year relevant to the previous year in 
which it began generation of power.
8.	
In so far as tariff determination is concerned, Section 61 of the 
Act of 2003 vests the Appropriate Commission, i.e., the Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission or the State Electricity Regulatory 
Commission, with the power to specify the terms and conditions for 
determination of tariff, guided by the factors enumerated therein under 
Clauses (a) to (i). Safeguarding of consumers’ interest is one such 
factor but promotion of co-generation and generation of electricity 
from renewable sources of energy is also a factor. Section 62 of 
the Act of 2003 deals with determination of tariff. It states that the 
Appropriate Commission shall determine the tariff in accordance 
with the provisions of the Act of 2003 for supply of electricity by a 
generating company to a distribution licensee. Section 64 enables 
a generating company or licensee to apply to the Appropriate 
Commission for determination of tariff under Section 62. A detailed 
procedure is prescribed thereunder as to how the Commission would 
then go about dealing with such an application. Once the Commission 
issues a tariff order upon such an application, Section 64(6) provides 
that such tariff order, unless amended or revoked, shall continue to 
be in force for such period as may be specified in the tariff order. 
The functions of State Electricity Regulatory Commissions, such 
as the GERC, are set out in Section 86 of the Act of 2003. Section 
86(1)(a) states that such Commission shall determine the tariff for 
352
Supreme Court Reports
generation, supply, transmission and wheeling of electricity, wholesale, 
bulk or retail, as the case may be, within the State. Section 86(1)(b) 
provides that the Commission shall regulate electricity purchase and 
procurement process of distribution licensees, including the price at 
which electricity shall be procured from the generating companies or 
licensees or from other sources, through agreements for purchase 
of power for distribution and supply within the State. 
9.	
This being the scheme forming the backdrop of the case, we may 
now take note of relevant case law. The decision of this Court in 
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited vs. EMCO Limited and another1 
pertained to a solar energy project and determination of tariff for that 
project. The GERC’s First Tariff Order, viz., Order No. 2 of 2010, 
was dated 29.01.2010 and the tariff per unit was fixed thereunder 
by the GERC for solar energy projects that availed the benefit of 
accelerated depreciation. The GERC made it clear that, for projects 
not availing such benefit, it would, on a petition in that respect, 
determine a separate tariff taking into account all the relevant facts. 
GUVNL entered into a PPA on 09.12.2010 for purchase of power 
from EMCO Ltd.’s solar energy project. While so, the Second Tariff 
Order came to be issued by the GERC on 27.01.2012 and was 
made applicable to solar power projects commissioned on or after 
29.01.2012. EMCO Ltd. commissioned its project on 02.03.2012 due 
to some delays and it did not avail accelerated depreciation under 
the Act of 1961. The tariff under the Second Tariff Order for projects 
availing accelerated depreciation was less favourable to them and 
the tariff payable to power producers which did not avail such benefit 
was more favourable. 
10.	 EMCO Ltd., thereupon, approached the GERC claiming entitlement 
to determination of tariff under the Second Tariff Order on the ground 
that it had not availed accelerated depreciation. The GERC held in its 
favour and the APTEL confirmed the same, holding that the Second 
Tariff Order applied as EMCO Ltd.’s project was commissioned only on 
02.03.2012. Further, as it had not availed accelerated depreciation, the 
APTEL held that the tariff determined without accelerated depreciation 
should be applied to it. GUVNL, thereupon, approached this Court. 
The case of EMCO Ltd. was that, though it had entered into a PPA 
1	
(2016) 11 SCC 182
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
353
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v.  
Green Infra Corporate Wind Private Limited and Others Etc.
during the control period specified in the First Tariff Order, it was not 
bound by the tariff mentioned therein and was entitled to seek fixation 
of tariff by the GERC under the Second Tariff Order. Per contra, 
GUVNL contended that the First Tariff Order was applicable only to 
those projects which availed the benefit of accelerated depreciation 
and if EMCO Ltd. did not wish to avail that benefit, it ought not to 
have entered into a PPA without first seeking determination of the 
tariff. GUVNL contended that, having chosen to enter into a PPA, 
EMCO Ltd. could not opt for not availing accelerated depreciation at 
a later point of time and claim the benefit of a more advantageous 
tariff under the Second Tariff Order. GUVNL further contended that 
the tariff under the First Tariff Order would not apply to only those 
power generating projects which, by operation of law and not by their 
own violation, were not entitled to claim accelerated depreciation. 
11.	 Noting that neither party had contended that, in law, there was a 
possibility of a power project not getting the benefit of accelerated 
depreciation if it opted for it, but assuming for the sake of argument 
that in law such a possibility exists, this Court observed that the 
construction sought to be placed on the relevant portion of the First 
Tariff Order by GUVNL could not be accepted, because it would be 
inherently illogical. The relevant portion of the First Tariff Order, in 
this context, stated that for a project that does not get such benefit 
of accelerated depreciation under the Act of 1961, the Commission 
would, on a petition in that respect, determine a separate tariff taking 
into account all the relevant facts. The submission of GUVNL as to 
the construction of the aforestated clause in the First Tariff Order 
was accordingly rejected by this Court. 
12.	 This Court, thereafter, dealt with the issue as to whether EMCO 
Ltd. had the right to exercise its choice not to avail accelerated 
depreciation after signing the PPA. This Court also considered the 
question as to whether it’s right under the Act of 1961 to make such 
a choice could be so exercised, resulting in a situation whereby 
GUVNL would be obliged under the PPA to purchase the power 
generated by it for a period of 25 years without knowing the price at 
which EMCO Ltd. would supply such power. The real question, per 
this Court, was as to what would be the point of time at which the 
power producer can exercise the right to seek the determination of a 
separate tariff? It was noted that the Act of 1961 gave the option to 
354
Supreme Court Reports
the power producer to avail or not to avail accelerated depreciation 
and also specified the point of time at which that option was to be 
exercised. However, the availability of such an option was held not 
to relieve the power producer of the contractual obligations incurred 
under the PPA. Significantly, no finding was recorded as to whether 
EMCO Ltd. had given a commitment to GUVNL about availing 
accelerated depreciation. It was also noted that the PPA contained 
a condition that, in case commissioning of the project was delayed 
beyond 31.12.2011, GUVNL would pay the tariff determined by GERC 
for solar energy projects effective on the date of commissioning of 
such project or the tariff mentioned in the PPA, whichever was lower. 
This stipulation, per this Court, envisaged a situation where EMCO 
Ltd. was not able to commence generation of electricity within the 
control period stipulated in the First Tariff Order and dealt with that 
contingency. It was, therefore, held that EMCO Ltd. could not seek 
tariff fixation under the Second Tariff Order. 
13.	 Certain observations in the above decision, taken in isolation, 
undoubtedly support the GUVNL presently but the law laid down 
in the said decision would have to be understood in the factual 
context thereof, involving two tariff orders and a specific condition 
in the PPA. This aspect was pointed out by this Court in Gujarat 
Urja Vikas Nigam Limited vs. Tarini Infrastructure Limited and 
others2. Therein, this Court had occasion to consider the power 
of the GERC to redetermine tariff even after execution of a PPA, 
incorporating a particular tariff. The question for consideration was 
specifically framed as to whether the tariff fixed under a PPA was 
sacrosanct or inviolable and beyond review and correction by the 
GERC, which is the statutory authority for fixation of tariff under the 
Act of 2003. The GERC had not conferred upon itself such power but 
the APTEL disagreed and held that such power would be available 
to the GERC. That is how the matter came before this Court at the 
behest of the GUVNL. Tarini Infrastructure Ltd. was a power producer 
which had setup hydropower projects. It entered into a PPA with 
GUVNL to supply power for a period of 35 years at a determined 
tariff. Thereafter, it sought enhancement of the tariff on the ground 
that additional infrastructure was required to be put up by it, in the 
2	
(2016) 8 SCC 743
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
355
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v.  
Green Infra Corporate Wind Private Limited and Others Etc.
form of a transmission line over 23 kilometres instead of the originally 
envisaged 4 kilometres. It applied to the GERC for redetermination 
of the tariff. The GERC, however, negated its plea on the ground 
that once the tariff was determined and incorporated in the PPA, 
there was no scope for redetermination at the unilateral request of 
the power producer. In another set of appeals, redetermination of 
the tariff was sought by power producer(s) therein on the ground 
of increase in the price of biomass fuel but it was rejected by the 
GERC on a similar ground. 
14.	 In appeal, the APTEL held that the GERC was clothed by the 
statute with the power to determine the tariff and, therefore, the tariff 
incorporated in a PPA was also liable to be reviewed in the light of 
changed circumstances of a given case. Taking note of the statutory 
scheme of the Act of 2003, this Court held that it would not be possible 
to hold that the tariff agreed by and between the parties, though it 
found mention in a contractual context, was the result of an act of 
volition of the parties which can, in no case, be altered except by 
mutual consent. It was affirmed that tariff determination was made 
in exercise of statutory powers and the same only got incorporated 
in a mutual agreement between the two parties involved. Referring 
to Section 86(1)(b) of the Act of 2003, this Court held that it must 
lean in favour of flexibility and not read inviolability into the terms of 
a PPA in so far as the tariff stipulated therein is concerned. It was 
further held that it would be a sound principle of interpretation to 
confer such power if public interest, dictated by surrounding events 
and circumstances, required review of the tariff. Dealing with the 
earlier judgment in EMCO Limited (supra), this Court observed 
that the power producer in that case did not seek determination of a 
separate tariff under the First Tariff Order, as it ought to have done, 
but sought tariff fixation under the Second Tariff Order, which was 
wholly inapplicable to it, given the terms of the First Tariff Order and 
the PPA. The decision in EMCO Limited (supra) was, therefore, 
distinguished on facts. 
15.	 We may now note certain facts which are of particular relevance to 
this adjudication. GUVNL entered into individual Power Purchase 
Agreements (PPAs) with the four respondent companies. These 
PPAs were entered into by them between June, 2010, and March, 
2012, i.e., during the 3-year control period specified in Order No.1 of 
356
Supreme Court Reports
2010 dated 30.01.2010 issued by the GERC and the four respondent 
companies also commissioned their wind energy projects during the 
said control period. Each of these PPAs contained a clause with regard 
to the tariff applicable for purchase of power from the respondent 
companies’ wind energy projects. For the purpose of illustration, 
clause 5.2 in the Power Purchase Agreement dated 28.03.2011 
pertaining to Green Infra Wind Power Limited is extracted hereunder:
‘5.2 GUVNL shall pay a fixed rate of Rs.3.56 per kWh 
for delivered energy as certified by SEA of Gujarat SLDC 
during the 25 years life of the project as determined by 
the Commission through Order No.1 of 2010 dated 30th 
January, 2010.’
16.	 It is an admitted fact that the four respondent companies signed PPAs 
with GUVNL with identical clauses therein. Having done so, they then 
approached the GERC seeking project-wise determination of tariff, 
claiming that they had not availed accelerated depreciation. This 
prayer was made by them in the subject petitions filed in 2012/2013 
before the GERC. GUVNL contested their claim before the GERC, 
arguing that these wind energy projects had willingly entered into 
PPAs with it, binding themselves to the tariff rate of ₹3.56 per kWh, 
and were, therefore, not at liberty to seek determination of tariff on 
a case-to-case basis thereafter. GUVNL asserted that, in the light 
of the valid, binding and enforceable contracts between the parties, 
embodied in the PPAs, the wind energy projects could not seek 
such benefit. It further asserted that, had these projects opted for 
a case-to-case specific tariff, it would not have even entered into 
PPAs with them. It claimed that it had not entered into any PPAs with 
wind energy projects that had not availed the benefit of accelerated 
depreciation and asserted that it could not be compelled to abide by 
the change of mind on the part of these wind energy projects and, 
thereby, be compelled to pay a higher tariff to them on the basis of 
a case-to-case determination by the GERC. 
17.	 This argument on the part of GUVNL would have been compelling, 
had it simply been a commercial contract between two profit-oriented 
business entities. However, we cannot lose sight of the fact that 
GUVNL is an instrumentality of the State and was, therefore, bound 
by the policy directives of the State. It cannot advance commercial 
considerations in isolation on par with a private party, divorced from 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
357
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v.  
Green Infra Corporate Wind Private Limited and Others Etc.
its responsibility to abide by and further the policy objectives of the 
State. In that context, it would be relevant to note the objectives 
underlying the Act of 2003 in relation to non-conventional and 
renewable energy sources, such as wind power, solar power, etc. 
Part II of the Act of 2003 is titled ‘National Electricity Policy and 
Plan’. Section 3 therein provides that the Central Government shall, 
from time to time, prepare the National Electricity Policy and tariff 
policy, in consultation with the State Governments and the Authority 
for development of the power system based on optimal utilization of 
resources such as coal, natural gas, nuclear substances or materials, 
hydro and renewable sources of energy. 
18.	 A separate Ministry of New and Renewable Energy was setup by 
the Government of India as the nodal Ministry for all matters relating 
to new and renewable energy. The broad aim of this Ministry is to 
develop and deploy new and renewable energy to supplement the 
energy requirements of the country. Energy self-sufficiency was 
identified as the major driver for developing and promoting new 
and renewable energy generation in the country in the wake of the 
two oil shocks of 1970s; the sudden increase in the price of oil; the 
uncertainties associated with its supply; and the adverse impact on 
the balance of payments position.
19.	 In furtherance of the policy and vision of the Government of India 
in relation to non-conventional renewable energy generation, the 
Government of Gujarat, through its Energy and Petro-chemicals 
Department, promulgated the Wind Power Policy – 2007 dated 
13.06.2007. It stated therein that it was keen on development of 
the renewable energy sector, given the dwindling resources of 
fossil fuels; increased threat of global warming; and the concerns 
of environmental protection. It further stated that it was committed 
to having investment in clean and green energy to reduce carbon 
dioxide emissions. In order to accelerate investment in this sector, 
the Government of Gujarat recognized that there was a need to 
extend Governmental support and, in that context, the Government 
reviewed its wind power policy. This new policy was to come into 
effect on 20.06.2007 and remain in operation till 30.06.2012. Wind 
Turbine Generators (WTGs) installed and commissioned during the 
operative period were to be considered eligible for the incentives 
declared under the policy for 20 years or for their life span, whichever 
358
Supreme Court Reports
was shorter. With regard to sale of such energy, the policy provided 
that the electricity generated by the WTGs may be sold to GUVNL 
and/or any distribution licensee within the State at the rate of ₹3.37 
per unit of electricity as per the GERC order, as amended from time 
to time. The requisite PPA was to be made between the purchaser 
of power and the eligible unit. Notably, the tariff of ₹3.37 per unit 
mentioned in the policy was relatable to the earlier Tariff Order of 
the GERC, viz., Order No.2 of 2006 dated 11.08.2006, which was 
in operation for a period of 3 years, i.e., upto 10.08.2009. Various 
other incentives were offered to WTGs under the aforestated policy of 
the Government of Gujarat. Thereafter, the Government of Gujarat’s 
Wind Power Policy-2013, effective from 25.07.2013 to 31.03.2016, 
reaffirmed its resolve and commitment to develop and promote wind 
energy projects, by offering them various incentives.
20.	 In the light of the aforestated policies and directives of the Government 
of Gujarat and as an instrumentality of the State, GUVNL was bound 
to promote and advance the objectives of the said policy. It may be 
noted that the PPAs executed by and between GUVNL and the four 
respondent companies specifically referred to the approvals given by 
the Gujarat Energy Development Agency (GEDA) for setting up of 
their wind energy projects. One such approval letter dated 01.08.2011 
issued by GEDA in favour of Green Infra Corporate Wind Private 
Limited was placed before us. Perusal thereof reflects that permission 
was granted to the said company to setup two WTGs subject to the 
terms and conditions specified in the Government of Gujarat’s Wind 
Policy, GERC orders pertaining to wind power and the conditions 
stipulated in the said letter. One of the conditions stipulated therein 
was that the company should enter into an Agreement with the 
GUVNL/DISCOM for selling or wheeling of the electricity generated 
from the Wind Farm. Though GUVNL was not the only distribution 
licensee in the State of Gujarat at that point of time, we cannot lose 
sight of the fact that, being a State-instrumentality, it was and is a 
major distributor of electricity across the State of Gujarat. 
21.	 Further, it is manifest and demonstrable from the statutory scheme 
obtaining under the Act of 2003 that the price at which power is to 
be procured by a distribution licensee from a generating company is 
not a matter of consensus and private agreement between the parties 
as it is to be fixed statutorily by the Appropriate Commission. GUVNL 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
359
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v.  
Green Infra Corporate Wind Private Limited and Others Etc.
cannot, therefore, fix its own price or bind a generating company 
to such price, contrary to the dictum of the GERC. Significantly, 
in Tariff Order No. 1 of 2010 dated 30.01.2010, the GERC clearly 
stipulated that the levelized price of ₹3.56 per kWh was to apply only 
to those wind energy projects that availed the benefit of accelerated 
depreciation under the Act of 1961 and the Rules of 1962. 
22.	 Pertinently, the scheme of the Act of 1961 and the Rules of 1962 
makes it clear that an assessee is required to choose the option of 
either availing accelerated depreciation or normal depreciation only 
at the time it files its return for the assessment year relatable to the 
previous year in which it started generation of power, if the same was 
after 01.04.1997. This liberty and discretion given to an assessee 
could not be truncated or cut-short by GUVNL by fixing a binding 
price unilaterally in the PPA executed long before the assessee had 
to statutorily choose its option, i.e., at the time it filed its return of 
income for the assessment year relatable to the previous year in 
which it actually started generation of power. 
23.	 The conundrum in which a power producer is placed in this scenario 
is patent. Unless it generates power and sells it to a distribution 
licensee under a PPA, the power producer would not file its return 
of income in relation thereto. It is only at that stage that it is required 
to exercise its option to choose the rate of depreciation, but it would 
have already signed a PPA as it cannot sell the power generated 
by it without first entering into a PPA. In such circumstances, the 
tariff mentioned in the PPA would necessarily have to be conditional 
and dependent upon exercise of the statutory option by the power 
producer at the relevant point of time. The situation would, however, 
be different if the power producer chooses its option at the time of 
entering into the PPA with the distribution licensee itself and gives 
a commitment to such distribution licensee that it would only avail 
accelerated depreciation when the time comes and would, therefore, 
be bound by the tariff fixed for power producers availing such benefit.
24.	 Admittedly, GUVNL never secured any written commitments from the 
four respondent companies that they would only avail accelerated 
depreciation and would not choose to opt for the regular depreciation 
rate when the time came. Without securing such commitments 
from them, merely because these companies signed the PPAs 
with a fixed tariff which was applicable only to those projects that 
availed accelerated depreciation, GUVNL cannot take advantage of 
360
Supreme Court Reports
its dominant position and its PPAs so as to bind them to the price 
mentioned therein for the entire life of their projects. As pointed out 
earlier, GUVNL is bound to promote and give effect to the Government’s 
policy of encouraging generation of power from renewable energy 
sources. When the Government promulgated a policy in that regard, 
offering various incentives to wind energy projects, GUVNL cannot 
act contrary thereto by fixing a tariff for purchase of power from 
such wind energy projects, which, on the face of it, is contrary to 
the mandate of Order No.1 of 2010 dated 30.01.2010 issued by the 
GERC. The said order put it beyond the pale of doubt that the tariff 
of ₹3.56 per kWh was applicable only to those wind energy projects 
that availed the benefit of accelerated depreciation. GUVNL does 
not dispute the fact that the four respondent companies did not avail 
such benefit. Ergo, the question of applying to them the tariff that 
was only meant for wind energy projects that did avail accelerated 
depreciation would not arise. GUVNL cannot be guided only by its 
own commercial interests, like a private business entity and it’s 
conduct, as a State-instrumentality, must be of the standard of a 
model citizen. However, patently unfair treatment was sought to be 
meted out by GUVNL to the respondent companies by binding them 
to a rate that was wholly inapplicable to them. Such conduct, akin 
to a Shylock, does not reflect positively upon GUVNL. 
25.	 Given the circumstances obtaining in the appeals on hand and in the 
light of the law laid down by this Court earlier in Tarini Infrastructure 
Limited (supra), it is not open to GUVNL to contend that the four 
respondent companies are estopped from seeking determination of 
tariff by the GERC as they had willingly signed PPAs with it at the 
tariff fixed for wind energy projects availing accelerated depreciation. 
As GUVNL failed to obtain commitments from the respondent 
companies that they would only avail accelerated depreciation at 
the time they had to choose that option, GUVNL has no indefeasible 
right to bind them to a tariff which was applicable only to such wind 
energy projects that availed accelerated depreciation. The GERC had 
made it quite clear that the tariff of ₹3.56 per kWh would apply only 
to those wind energy projects that availed accelerated depreciation. 
Therefore, that tariff has no application to a wind energy project 
that did not avail accelerated depreciation. GUVNL cannot apply 
that wholly inapplicable tariff to the respondent companies which, 
[2025] 8 S.C.R. 
361
Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited v.  
Green Infra Corporate Wind Private Limited and Others Etc.
admittedly, did not avail accelerated depreciation. The orders passed 
by the GERC and the APTEL holding to this effect, therefore, do not 
brook any interference. 
The appeals are bereft of merit and are, accordingly, dismissed.
Order dated 03.02.2023 shall stand vacated.
Pending applications, if any, shall also stand dismissed. 
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey