[2025] 4 S.C.R. 551 : 2025 INSC 450
Sangita Sinha 
v. 
Bhawana Bhardwaj and Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 4972 of 2025)
04 April 2025
[Dipankar Datta and Manmohan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether a suit for specific performance of an agreement 
to sell is liable to be decreed if the buyer had accepted the refund 
of the majority of the earnest money deposit/advance consideration, 
during the pendency of the suit.
Headnotes†
Specific Performance Act, 1963 – Specific performance of an 
agreement – Acceptance by buyer of refund of consideration 
amount – Effect on relief of specific performance – Unregistered 
agreement to sell executed between the buyer-respondent 
no. 1 and the seller – Buyer paid certain sum in cash and issued 
three post-dated cheques – Upon failure of seller to execute 
the sale deed, buyer filed a suit seeking specific performance 
of agreement to sell – Seller made a complaint to the police 
stating that her signatures had been fraudulently taken on 
the agreement to sell and seller issued a letter cancelling the 
agreement, and refunded some amount through demand drafts 
and returned two of three post dated cheques, which were 
subsequently encashed – On death of the seller, respondent 
no. 3-step grandson of seller impleaded along with appellant 
in whose favour subject property had been bequeathed – Trial 
court passed the judgment in favour of the buyer – High Court 
upheld the same – Correctness:
Held: Conduct of buyer in encashing the demand drafts establishes 
beyond doubt that the buyer was not willing to perform her part of 
agreement to sell and proceed with execution of the sale deed, 
and the fact that entire advance consideration/earnest money had 
not been returned to the buyer is irrelevant and immaterial – Act 
of buyer in encashing the demand drafts leads to an irresistible 
* Author
552
conclusion that the agreement stood cancelled – Seller had 
issued a letter cancelling the Agreement to Sell prior to the filing 
of the suit, the same constitutes a jurisdictional fact as till the said 
cancellation is set aside, the buyer is not entitled to the relief of 
specific performance – Thus, in absence of a prayer for declaratory 
relief that cancellation of the agreement is bad in law, suit for 
specific performance not maintainable – Plea that appellant lacked 
the locus standi to file the present appeal as she did not have any 
right, interest or title over the subject property is misconceived on 
facts – Appellant is a beneficiary under the Will executed by the 
original owner/seller, whereby the subject property was bequeathed 
in her favour – Appellant, being a necessary and interested party 
to the lis, has the locus to file the present appeal – Furthermore, 
the onus to establish readiness and willingness is on the buyer 
and the failure to establish the same disentitles the buyer from 
the equitable and discretionary relief of specific performance – 
Buyer failed to disclose in the plaint that the seller had issued the 
cancellation letter, enclosing demand drafts and cheques which 
amounts to suppression of material fact, disentitling her from the 
discretionary relief of specific performance – Thus, agreement 
to sell cannot be specifically enforced – Impugned judgment set 
aside – Sale deed executed in favour of buyer declared null and 
void. [Paras 15, 17-21, 25-30]
Specific performance – Specific performance of – Grant of 
relief – ‘Readiness’ and ‘willingness’ to perform contract – 
Explanation: 
Held: ‘Readiness’ and ‘willingness’ are not one but two separate 
elements – ‘Readiness’ means the capacity of the buyer to perform 
the contract, which would include the financial position to pay the 
sale consideration – ‘Willingness’ refers to the intention of the 
buyer as a purchaser to perform his part of the contract, which is 
inferred by scrutinising the conduct of the buyer/purchaser, including 
attending circumstances – Continuous readiness and willingness 
on the part of the buyer/purchaser from the date of execution of 
Agreement to Sell till the date of the decree, is a condition precedent 
for grant of relief of specific performance – It is not enough to show 
the readiness and willingness up to the date of the plaint as the 
conduct must be such as to disclose readiness and willingness at 
all times from the date of the contract and throughout the pendency 
of the suit up to the decree. [Paras 17-20]
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
553
Sangita Sinha v. Bhawana Bhardwaj and Ors.
Case Law Cited
R. Kandasamy (Since Dead) & Ors. v. T.R.K. Sarawathy & Anr., 
Civil Appeal No. 3015 of 2013 decided on 21st November 2024; 
Mehboob-Ur-Rehman (Dead) through Legal Representatives v. 
Ahsanul Ghani [2019] 2 SCR 169 : (2019) 19 SCC 415; C.S. 
Venkatesh v. A.S.C. Murthy (Dead) by Legal Representatives 
and Ors. [2020] 2 SCR 676 : (2020) 3 SCC 280; Kamal Kumar v. 
Premlata Joshi and Ors. [2019] 1 SCR 54 : (2019) 3 SCC 704; P. 
Daivasigamani v. S. Sambandan [2022] 18 SCR 199 : (2022) 14 
SCC 793; Gomathinayagam Pillai and Ors. v. Palaniswami Nadar 
[1967] 1 SCR 227; Vijay Kumar and Others v. Om Parkash, 2018 
SCC OnLine SC 1913; J.P. Builders and Another v. A. Ramadas 
Rao and Another [2010] 15 SCR 538 : (2011) 1 SCC 429; Umabai 
and Another v. Nilkanth Dhondiba Chavan (Dead) By LRs. and 
Another [2005] 3 SCR 521 : (2005) 6 SCC 243; I.S. Sikandar 
(Dead) By LRs. v. K. Subramani and Others [2013] 17 SCR 24 : 
(2013) 15 SCC 27; A. Kanthamani v. Nasreen Ahmed [2017] 2 
SCR 610 : (2017) 4 SCC 654; Shrisht Dhawan (Smt) v. Shaw 
Bros. [1991] Supp. 3 SCR 446 : (1992) 1 SCC 534; Citadel Fine 
Pharmaceuticals v. Ramaniyam Real Estates Private Limited and 
Another [2011] 13 SCR 605 : (2011) 9 SCC 147 – referred to.
List of Acts
Specific Performance Act, 1963
List of Keywords
Specific relief; Agreement to sell; Equitable and discretionary relief 
of specific performance; Readiness and Willingness’ to perform 
contract; Cancellation of agreement; Encashing demand drafts; 
Acceptance by buyer of refund of consideration; Necessary and 
interested party; Suppression of material facts; Suit for specific 
performance of an agreement to sell; Refund of the majority of the 
earnest money deposit/advance consideration during the pendency 
of the suit; Locus to file.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4972 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 09.05.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Patna in F.A. No. 83 of 2018
554
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
S. B. Upadhyay, Sr. Adv., Ms. Indu Kaul, Rajiv Kumar Sinha,  
Raj Kumar, Abhinav Kathuria.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Mungeshwar Sahoo, Ardhendumauli Kumar Prasad Sr. Advs., 
Samrandra Kumar, Vivek Kumar Srivastva, Pawan Kumar,  
Ravi Bhushan Upadhyay, Ramesh Kumar Mishra, Shivam Tiwary, 
Vishal Arun Mishra, Ramesh Kumar Mishra, Shivam Tiwary,  
Ms. Anusha Rathore, Shivank S. Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Manmohan, J
1.	
Leave granted. 
2.	
The primary issue that arises for consideration in the present civil 
appeal is whether a suit for specific performance of an Agreement 
to Sell is liable to be decreed if the buyer had accepted the refund 
of majority of the earnest money deposit/advance consideration, 
during the pendency of the civil suit? 
3.	
Brief facts leading to the present appeal are as under:-
3.1.	 Late Kushum Kumari (“original defendant” / “seller”) was 
allotted the subject property by the People’s Cooperative House 
Construction Society Limited (“Society”) vide a registered sub-
lease dated 2nd April 1968.
3.2.	 On 25th January 2008, an unregistered Agreement to Sell with 
respect to the subject property was executed between the 
“Respondent No.1-buyer”-plaintiff and the seller for a total sale 
consideration of Rs. 25,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty Five Lakhs). 
At the time of the execution of the Agreement to Sell, the 
Respondent No.1-buyer paid a sum of Rs.2,51,000/- (Rupees 
Two Lakh Fifty One Thousand) in cash to the seller and issued 
three post-dated cheques worth Rs.7,50,000/- (Rupees Seven 
Lakh Fifty Thousand). 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
555
Sangita Sinha v. Bhawana Bhardwaj and Ors.
3.3.	 It is the case of Respondent No.1-buyer that when she visited 
the subject property along with her husband on 11th February 
2008, the tenants of the seller created a scuffle and forced 
them to return. In the circumstance, the Respondent No.1-
buyer issued legal notices dated 23rd February 2008 and 23rd 
April 2008, expressing her intention to pay the balance sale 
consideration and to get the property registered in her favour. 
3.4.	 Upon the failure of the seller to execute the sale deed, 
Respondent No.1-buyer filed a suit before the Trial Court, Sub 
Judge-IV, Patna under the Specific Performance Act, 1963 (“Act, 
1963)” seeking specific performance of the Agreement to Sell 
dated 25th January 2008 and the same was registered as Title 
Suit No. TS/176/2008 (“subject suit”). 
3.5.	 The subject suit was contested by the seller by filing a written 
statement, stating therein that she came to know about the 
Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008 on 5th February 2008 
and immediately thereafter, made a complaint dated 6th February 
2008 with the Inspector of Police-cum-Station House Officer, 
Kankarbagh Police Station, Patna stating that her signatures 
had been fraudulently taken on the Agreement to Sell dated 
25th January 2008. It was further stated that the seller issued a 
letter dated 7th January 2008 cancelling the Agreement to Sell 
dated 25th January 2008 and refunded Rs.2,11,000/- (Rupees 
Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) through five demand drafts dated 
7th February 2008 in lieu of the cash and returned two of the 
three post-dated cheques of Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh 
Fifty Thousand) each, which were issued by the seller. Vide 
Order dated 16th December 2008, issues were framed by the 
Trial Court. 
3.6.	 Upon the demise of the seller, the Respondent No.3 herein, who 
is the step grandson of the seller, was impleaded as substituted 
defendant no. 1 and the appellant herein was impleaded as 
defendant no. 3 as the subject property had been bequeathed 
in her favour by way of a Will dated 23rd September 2002 
executed by the original owner/seller.
3.7.	 After consideration of the depositions of PW-1 (Respondent 
No.1 herein) and her husband, PW-2, the Trial Court framed 
three additional issues vide order dated 21st January 2013. 
556
The issues were framed once again on 27th April 2018, and a 
judgment was passed in favour of Respondent No.1-buyer on 
the same date.
3.8.	 The judgment dated 27th April 2018 and the decree dated 10th 
May 2018 were challenged by the appellant herein in First Appeal 
No. 83 of 2018. The said appeal was dismissed by the Patna 
High Court vide the impugned Judgment dated 9th May 2024. 
3.9.	 Upon the present Special Leave Petition being filed, this Court, 
while issuing notice, had directed parties to maintain status quo 
with respect to the possession on 20th August 2024.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
4.	
Shri S.B. Upadhyay, learned senior counsel for the appellant, stated 
that the signatures of the seller on the Agreement to Sell dated 25th 
January 2008 had been fraudulently obtained by Respondent No.3 
herein. He stated that the seller-defendant signed some blank papers 
believing the same to be related to the Will that she had executed 
in favour of the appellant on 23rd September 2002. 
5.	
He stated that upon the discovery of the Agreement to Sell dated 
25th January 2008 on 5th February 2008, the seller made a criminal 
complaint dated 6th February 2008 with the Inspector of Police-
cum-Station House Officer, Kankarbagh, Patna that her signatures 
had been fraudulently obtained on the Agreement to Sell dated 25th 
January 2008. 
6.	
He stated that on 7th February 2008, the seller wrote a letter to 
Respondent No.1-buyer cancelling the Agreement to Sell dated 
25th January 2008 enclosing therewith five demand drafts dated 
7th February 2008 amounting to Rs. 2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh 
Eleven Thousand) in lieu of the cash and two of the three post-dated 
cheques of Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Fifty Thousand) each, 
which were issued by the Respondent No.1-buyer. 
7.	
He pointed out that the Respondent No.1-buyer as well as her 
husband-PW2, in their depositions, have admitted that they had 
received five demand drafts dated 7th February 2008 amounting 
to Rs. 2,11,000/-(Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) in lieu of 
the cash and also received two of the three post-dated cheques of 
Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Fifty Thousand) along with the letter 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
557
Sangita Sinha v. Bhawana Bhardwaj and Ors.
cancelling the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008 in March 
2008. He explained that five demand drafts dated 7th February 2008 
of Rs.2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) were encashed 
by the Respondent No.1-buyer in July 2008, after institution of the 
subject suit on 5th May 2008. He submitted that the encashment of 
the demand drafts amounted to revocation of the Agreement to Sell 
dated 25th January 2008. He contended that the subject suit was filed 
by the Respondent No.1-buyer after revocation of the Agreement 
to Sell dated 25th January 2008, without seeking any relief against 
the revocation and without disclosing that she was in receipt of the 
demand drafts and post-dated cheques. 
8.	
He contended that the subject suit was filed on the basis of an 
Agreement to Sell which stood cancelled and as such, the same was 
not maintainable. He submitted that existence of a valid agreement 
is sine qua non for grant of relief of specific performance. He pointed 
out that, in similar circumstances, this Court in R. Kandasamy 
(Since Dead) & Ors. vs. T.R.K. Sarawathy & Anr. (Civil Appeal 
No. 3015 of 2013 decided on 21st November 2024), had set aside 
the judgment and decree passed in favour of the Respondent No.1-
buyer inter alia on the ground that a non-existent Agreement to Sell 
cannot be enforced by a Court of law. 
9.	
Even otherwise, he contended that the Respondent No.1-buyer was 
not ready and willing to perform the Agreement to Sell dated 25th 
January 2008. He stated that a mere averment that the Respondent 
No.1-buyer is ready and willing to perform the contract will not suffice 
as readiness and willingness must be inferred in overall circumstances 
of the case, including the conduct of the Respondent No.1-buyer 
prior and subsequent to the filing of the suit. 
10.	 He pointed out that the Respondent No.1-buyer in her cross-
examination, had admitted that at the time of execution of the 
agreement, she was not aware of the balance in her bank account 
and at the time when the three post-dated cheques for Rs.2,50,000/- 
(Rupees Two Lakh Fifty Thousand) were issued, there was no 
sufficient balance in her account. He contended that the conduct of 
the Respondent No.1-buyer in encashing the demand drafts proved 
that she was not ready or willing to perform the contract. In support 
of his contentions, he relied upon the judgments of this Court in 
Mehboob-Ur-Rehman (Dead) through Legal Representatives 
558
vs. Ahsanul Ghani (2019) 19 SCC 415 and C.S. Venkatesh vs. 
A.S.C. Murthy (Dead) by Legal Representatives and Ors. (2020) 
3 SCC 280. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO. 1 
11.	 Per contra, Mr. Mungeshwar Sahoo, learned senior counsel for the 
Respondent No.1-buyer stated that the suit had been decreed in 
favour of the Respondent No.1-buyer by the Trial Court after rightly 
appreciating the evidence and a sale deed had been executed 
subsequently in favour of the Respondent No.1-buyer upon deposit 
of Rs. 24,61,000/- (Rupees Twenty Four Lakh Sixty One Thousand) 
before the Trial Court. He contended that the judgment and decree 
passed by the Trial Court had been rightly upheld by the High 
Court. He stated that the entire case of the appellant in the present 
proceedings is based upon reappreciation of evidence and the same 
cannot be permitted at this stage. 
12.	 He stated that the entire earnest money/advance consideration 
had not been refunded/returned by the seller. He stated that the 
Respondent No.1-buyer had paid Rs.2,51,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh 
Fifty One Thousand) in cash to the seller against which the seller 
had refunded Rs.2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) 
through five demand drafts dated 7th February 2008. Therefore, 
according to him, an amount of Rs. 40,000/- (Rupees Forty Thousand) 
remained with the seller as earnest money/advance consideration. 
He contended that as the balance sale consideration had been paid 
subsequently, the cancellation of the Agreement to Sell dated 25th 
January 2008 was not valid. 
13.	 Even otherwise, he stated that a bilateral agreement cannot be 
unilaterally cancelled by a party by returning the earnest money. 
According to him, a (bilateral) agreement can only be cancelled by a 
Court of law or by executing a subsequent agreement, cancelling the 
prior agreement. He stated that in the event parties are permitted to 
unilaterally cancel the agreement, the purchaser will be left remediless 
as any third party can intervene by offering a higher earnest money. 
14.	 He contended that the seller passed away before she could prove her 
defense by leading evidence. He stated that neither the appellant nor 
the Respondent No.3 herein had deposed in support of the written 
statement filed by the seller. He therefore stated that the written 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
559
Sangita Sinha v. Bhawana Bhardwaj and Ors.
statement of the seller had not been proved. He also contended 
that the appellant did not have the locus to file the present appeal. 
According to him, the appellant had no right, title or interest in the 
subject property and the findings of the Trial Court or the High Court 
do not affect the appellant in any manner. 
COURT’S REASONING
RESPONDENT NO.1 WAS NOT WILLING TO PERFORM THE 
AGREEMENT TO SELL
15.	 Having heard learned senior counsel / learned counsel for the 
parties and having perused the paper book, the admitted position 
that emerges is that Respondent No.1-buyer had paid Rs. 2,51,000/- 
(Rupees Two Lakh Fifty One Thousand) in cash and handed over 
three post-dated cheques of Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Fifty 
Thousand) each at the time of execution of the Agreement to Sell 
dated 25th January 2008. It is also not disputed that the Respondent 
No.1-buyer had subsequently received a letter dated 7th February 
2008 cancelling the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008 
enclosing therewith five demand drafts dated 7th February 2008 
totaling to Rs.2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) (in 
lieu of the cash paid by the Respondent No.1-buyer) along with 
two of the three post-dated cheques of Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two 
Lakh Fifty Thousand) each, which had been issued initially by the 
Respondent No.1-buyer. Further, the third post-dated cheque which 
was not returned to the Respondent No.1-buyer had not been 
encashed. The Respondent No.1-buyer has admitted that the letter 
dated 7th February 2008 had been received prior to filing of the suit 
for specific performance and five demand drafts dated 7th February 
2008 totaling to Rs.2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) 
had been encashed in July, 2008 after institution of the subject suit 
on 5th May 2008, without raising any objection with respect to the 
difference in the cash amount and the demand drafts furnished by 
the seller. 
16.	 It is settled law that under the Act, 1963, prior to the 2018 Amendment, 
specific performance was a discretionary and equitable relief. In 
Kamal Kumar vs. Premlata Joshi and Ors. (2019) 3 SCC 704, 
which has been followed in P. Daivasigamani vs. S. Sambandan 
(2022) 14 SCC 793, this Court framed material questions which 
560
require consideration prior to grant of relief of specific performance. 
The relevant portion of the judgment in Kamal Kumar (supra) is 
reproduced hereinbelow:
“7. It is a settled principle of law that the grant of relief of 
specific performance is a discretionary and equitable relief. 
The material questions, which are required to be gone into 
for grant of the relief of specific performance, are: 
7.1. First, whether there exists a valid and concluded 
contract between the parties for sale/purchase of the suit 
property. 
7.2. Second, whether the plaintiff has been ready and 
willing to perform his part of contract and whether he is 
still ready and willing to perform his part as mentioned in 
the contract. 
7.3. Third, whether the plaintiff has, in fact, performed 
his part of the contract and, if so, how and to what extent 
and in what manner he has performed and whether such 
performance was in conformity with the terms of the 
contract; 
7.4. Fourth, whether it will be equitable to grant the 
relief of specific performance to the plaintiff against the 
defendant in relation to suit property or it will cause any 
kind of hardship to the defendant and, if so, how and in 
what manner and the extent if such relief is eventually 
granted to the plaintiff; 
7.5. Lastly, whether the plaintiff is entitled for grant of any 
other alternative relief, namely, refund of earnest money, 
etc. and, if so, on what grounds. 
8. In our opinion, the aforementioned questions are part of the 
statutory requirements [See Sections 16(c), 20, 21, 22, 23 of the 
Specific Relief Act, 1963 and Forms 47/48 of Appendices A to C of 
the Code of Civil Procedure]. These requirements have to be properly 
pleaded by the parties in their respective pleadings and proved with 
the aid of evidence in accordance with law. It is only then the Court 
is entitled to exercise its discretion and accordingly grant or refuse 
the relief of specific performance depending upon the case made 
out by the parties on facts.” 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
561
Sangita Sinha v. Bhawana Bhardwaj and Ors.
17.	 It is trite law that ‘readiness’ and ‘willingness’ are not one but two 
separate elements. ‘Readiness’ means the capacity of the Respondent 
No.1-buyer to perform the contract, which would include the financial 
position to pay the sale consideration. ‘Willingness’ refers to the 
intention of the Respondent No.1-buyer as a purchaser to perform 
his part of the contract, which is inferred by scrutinising the conduct 
of the Respondent No.1-buyer /purchaser, including attending 
circumstances. 
18.	 Continuous readiness and willingness on the part of the Respondent 
No.1-buyer /purchaser from the date of execution of Agreement to 
Sell till the date of the decree, is a condition precedent for grant 
of relief of specific performance. This Court in various judicial 
pronouncements has held that it is not enough to show the readiness 
and willingness up to the date of the plaint as the conduct must 
be such as to disclose readiness and willingness at all times from 
the date of the contract and throughout the pendency of the suit 
up to the decree. A few of the said judgments are reproduced 
hereinbelow:-
A.	
In Gomathinayagam Pillai and Ors. vs. Palaniswami Nadar 
(1967) 1 SCR 227, it has been held as under:-
“6. But the respondent has claimed a decree for 
specific performance and it is for him to establish that 
he was, since the date of the contract, continuously 
ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. 
If he fails to do so, his claim for specific performance 
must fail. As observed by the Judicial Committee of 
the Privy Council in Ardeshir Mama v. Flora Sassoon 
1928 SCC OnLine PC 43:
“In a suit for specific performance, on the other hand, 
he treated and was required by the Court to treat 
the contract as still subsisting. He had in that suit to 
allege, and if the fact was traversed, he was required 
to prove a continuous readiness and willingness, from 
the date of the contract to the time of the hearing, 
to perform the contract on his part. Failure to make 
good that averment brought with it the inevitable 
dismissal of his suit.” 
562
The respondent must in a suit for specific performance 
of an agreement plead and prove that he was ready and 
willing to perform his part of the contract continuously 
between the date of the contract and the date of hearing 
of the suit….”
(emphasis supplied)
B.	
In Vijay Kumar and Others vs. Om Parkash, 2018 SCC 
OnLine SC 1913, it has been held as under:- 
“6. In order to obtain a decree for specific performance, 
the plaintiff has to prove his readiness and 
willingness to perform his part of the contract 
and the readiness and willingness has to be 
shown throughout and has to be established by 
the plaintiff….”
(emphasis supplied)
C.	
In J.P.Builders and Another vs. A. Ramadas Rao and Another 
(2011) 1 SCC 429, it has been held as under:- 
“27. It is settled law that even in the absence of specific 
plea by the opposite party, it is the mandate of the 
statute that the plaintiff has to comply with Section 
16(c) of the Specific Relief Act and when there is 
non-compliance with this statutory mandate, the court 
is not bound to grant specific performance and is left 
with no other alternative but to dismiss the suit. It 
is also clear that readiness to perform must be 
established throughout the relevant points of time. 
“Readiness and willingness” to perform the part 
of the contract has to be determined/ascertained 
from the conduct of the parties.”
(emphasis supplied)
D.	
In Umabai and Another vs. Nilkanth Dhondiba Chavan 
(Dead) By LRs. and Another (2005) 6 SCC 243, it has been 
held as under:- 
“30. It is now well settled that the conduct of the 
parties, with a view to arrive at a finding as to 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
563
Sangita Sinha v. Bhawana Bhardwaj and Ors.
whether the plaintiff-respondents were all along and 
still are ready and willing to perform their part of 
contract as is mandatorily required under Section 
16 (c) of the Specific Relief Act must be determined 
having regard to the entire attending circumstances.  
A bare averment in the plaint or a statement 
made in the examination-in- chief would not 
suffice. The conduct of the plaintiff- respondents 
must be judged having regard to the entirety of 
the pleadings as also the evidence brought on 
records.”
(emphasis supplied)
E.	
In Mehboob-Ur-Rehman (Dead) through Legal 
Representatives v. Ahsanul Ghani (supra), it has been held 
as under:-
“16. Such a requirement, of necessary averment 
in the plaint, that he has already performed or has 
always been ready and willing to perform the essential 
terms of the contract which are to be performed by 
him being on the plaintiff, mere want of objection by 
the defendant in the written statement is hardly of 
any effect or consequence. The essential question 
to be addressed to by the Court in such a matter 
has always been as to whether, by taking the 
pleading and the evidence on record as a whole, 
the plaintiff has established that he has performed 
his part of the contract or has always been ready 
and willing to do so...”
(emphasis supplied)
F.	
In C.S. Venkatesh v. A.S.C. Murthy (Dead) by Legal 
Representatives & Ors. (supra), it has been held as under:- 
“16. The words “ready and willing” imply that the 
plaintiff was prepared to carry out those parts of the 
contract to their logical end so far as they depend 
upon his performance. The continuous readiness and 
willingness on the part of the plaintiff is a condition 
564
precedent to grant the relief of performance. If the 
plaintiff fails to either aver or prove the same, he 
must fail. To adjudge whether the plaintiff is ready 
and willing to perform his part of contract, the court 
must take into consideration the conduct of the plaintiff 
prior, and subsequent to the filing of the suit along with 
other attending circumstances. The amount which he 
has to pay the defendant must be of necessity to be 
proved to be available. Right from the date of the 
execution of the contract till the date of decree, 
he must prove that he is ready and willing to 
perform his part of the contract. The court may 
infer from the facts and circumstances whether 
the plaintiff was ready and was always ready to 
perform his contract.
17. In N.P. Thirugnanam v. R. Jagan Mohan Rao 
[N.P. Thirugnanam v. R. Jagan Mohan Rao (1995) 5 
SCC 115], it was held that continuous readiness and 
willingness on the part of the plaintiff is a condition 
precedent to grant of the relief of specific performance. 
This circumstance is material and relevant and is 
required to be considered by the court while granting 
or refusing to grant the relief. If the plaintiff fails 
to either aver or prove the same, he must fail. To 
adjudge whether the plaintiff is ready and willing 
to perform his part of the contract, the court must 
take into consideration the conduct of the plaintiff 
prior to and subsequent to the filing of the suit 
along with other attending circumstances. The 
amount of consideration which he has to pay to 
the defendant must necessarily be proved to be 
available.
18. In Pushparani S. Sundaram v. Pauline Manomani 
James [Pushparani S. Sundaram v. Pauline Manomani 
James (2002) 9 SCC 582], this Court has held that 
inference of readiness and willingness could be drawn 
from the conduct of the plaintiff and the totality of 
circumstances in a particular case. It was held thus: 
(SCC p. 584, para 5)
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
565
Sangita Sinha v. Bhawana Bhardwaj and Ors.
“5. … So far these being a plea that they were 
ready and willing to perform their part of the 
contract is there in the pleading, we have no 
hesitation to conclude, that this by itself is not 
sufficient to hold that the appellants were ready 
and willing in terms of Section 16(c) of the 
Specific Relief Act. This requires not only such 
plea but also proof of the same. Now examining 
the first of the two circumstances, how could 
mere filing of this suit, after exemption was 
granted be a circumstance about willingness 
or readiness of the plaintiff. This at the most 
could be the desire of the plaintiff to have this 
property. It may be for such a desire this suit 
was filed raising such a plea. But Section 16(c) 
of the said Act makes it clear that mere plea 
is not sufficient, it has to be proved.”
(emphasis supplied)
19.	 Consequently, the readiness and willingness of the buyer to go 
ahead with the sale of the property at the time of the institution of the 
suit loses its relevance, if the Respondent No.1-buyer is unable to 
establish that the readiness and willingness has continued throughout 
the pendency of the suit. 
20.	 After examination of the pleadings and evidence in the present suit 
as well as the conduct of the Respondent No.1-buyer, this Court is 
unable to agree with Respondent No.1-buyer that she was willing 
to perform the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January, 2008 and go 
ahead with the purchase of the property. This Court says so because 
admittedly, as noted above, the five demand drafts dated 7th February 
2008 for Rs. 2,11,000/- (Rupees Two Lakh Eleven Thousand) were 
encashed by the Respondent No.1-buyer in July, 2008. The conduct 
of the Respondent No.1-buyer in encashing the demand drafts 
establishes beyond doubt that the Respondent No.1-buyer was not 
willing to perform her part of the Agreement to Sell and proceed with 
execution of the sale deed; for the Respondent No.1-buyer would 
not have encashed the demand drafts if she was indeed willing to 
perform the contract and have a sale deed executed. Consequently, 
once it is established that the Respondent No. 1-buyer is not willing 
566
to perform the contract, the fact that the entire advance consideration/
earnest money had not been returned to Respondent No.1-buyer is 
irrelevant and immaterial.
THE AGREEMENT TO SELL DATED 25TH JANUARY 2008 STOOD 
CANCELLED / TERMINATED.
21.	 This Court is also of the view that the act of the Respondent No.1-buyer 
in encashing the demand drafts leads to an irresistible conclusion 
that the agreement in question stood cancelled. 
22.	 The contention of the learned counsel for the Respondent No. 1-buyer 
that the Agreement to Sell dated 25th January 2008 could not have 
been cancelled unilaterally is contrary to facts as the letter dated 07th 
February 2008 along with the refund of the demand drafts and two 
post-dated cheques was nothing but repudiation of the Agreement 
to Sell dated 25th January 2008 by the seller and the encashment 
of the demand drafts was acceptance of such repudiation by the 
Respondent No.1-buyer, leading to cancellation of the Agreement 
to Sell dated 25th January 2008. 
23.	 The contention that the demand drafts were encashed under protest 
is misconceived on facts as there is nothing on record to show that 
the demand drafts were encashed under protest. In fact, PW-2, who 
is the husband of the Respondent No.1-buyer, has deposed that 
upon receipt of the demand drafts and cheques, the Respondent 
No.1-buyer had not issued any letter to the seller stating that the 
amounts received by them were less than the earnest money paid 
by them.
ABSENT A PRAYER FOR DECLARATORY RELIEF THAT 
CANCELLATION OF THE AGREEMENT IS BAD IN LAW, A SUIT 
FOR SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE IS NOT MAINTAINABLE
24.	 This Court further finds that the seller had admittedly issued a letter 
dated 7th February 2008 cancelling the Agreement to Sell dated 25th 
January 2008, prior to the filing of the subject suit on 5th May 2008. 
Even though the demand drafts enclosed with the letter dated 07th 
February, 2008 were subsequently encashed in July, 2008, yet this 
Court is of the view that it was incumbent upon the Respondent 
No.1-buyer to seek a declaratory relief that the said cancellation is 
bad in law and not binding on parties for the reason that existence 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
567
Sangita Sinha v. Bhawana Bhardwaj and Ors.
of a valid agreement is sine qua non for the grant of relief of specific 
performance. 
25.	 This Court in I.S. Sikandar (Dead) By LRs. v. K. Subramani and 
Others (2013) 15 SCC 27 has held that in absence of a prayer for 
a declaratory relief that the termination of the agreement is bad 
in law, the suit for specific performance of that agreement is not 
maintainable. Though subsequently, this Court in A. Kanthamani 
Vs. Nasreen Ahmed (2017) 4 SCC 654 has held that the declaration 
of law in I.S. Sikander (Dead) By LRs. v. K. Subramani (supra) 
regarding non-maintainability of the suit in the absence of a challenge 
to letter of termination is confined to the facts of the said case, yet 
the aforesaid issue has been recently considered in R. Kandasamy 
(Since Dead) & Ors. v. T.R.K. Sarawathy & Anr. (supra) authored by 
brother Justice Dipankar Datta and the conflict between the judgment 
of I.S. Sikander (Dead) By LRs. v. K. Subramani (supra) and A. 
Kanthamani Vs. Nasreen Ahmed (supra) has been deliberated 
upon. In R. Kandasamy (Since Dead) & Ors. v. T.R.K. Sarawathy 
& Anr. (supra), it has been clarified that the appellate court would 
not be precluded from examining whether the jurisdictional fact 
exists for grant of relief of specific performance, notwithstanding 
the fact that the trial Court omitted or failed to frame an issue on 
maintainability of the suit. The relevant portion of the judgment in 
R. Kandasamy (Since Dead) & Ors. v. T.R.K. Sarawathy & Anr. 
(supra) is reproduced hereinbelow:
“25. What follows from A. Kanthamani (supra) is that 
unless an issue as to maintainability is framed by the Trial 
Court, the suit cannot be held to be not maintainable at 
the appellate stage only because appropriate declaratory 
relief has not been prayed.
xxx
43. In Shrisht Dhawan (Smt) v. Shaw Bros. (1992) 1 
SCC 534, an interesting discussion on ‘jurisdictional fact’ is 
found in the concurring opinion of Hon’ble R. M. Sahai, J. 
(as His Lordship then was). It reads:
“19. *** What, then, is an error in respect of 
jurisdictional fact? A jurisdictional fact is one on 
existence or non-existence of which depends 
568
assumption or refusal to assume jurisdiction by 
a court, tribunal or an authority. In Black’s Legal 
Dictionary it is explained as a fact which must exist 
before a court can properly assume jurisdiction of a 
particular case. Mistake of fact in relation to jurisdiction 
is an error of jurisdictional fact. No statutory authority 
or tribunal can assume jurisdiction in respect of 
subject matter which the statute does not confer on 
it and if by deciding erroneously the fact on which 
jurisdiction depends the court or tribunal exercises 
the jurisdiction then the order is vitiated. Error of 
jurisdictional fact renders the order ultra vires and bad 
(Wade, Administrative Law. In Raza Textiles [(1973) 1 
SCC 633] it was held that a court or tribunal cannot 
confer jurisdiction on itself by deciding a jurisdictional 
fact wrongly. ***
(emphasis supplied)
44. Borrowing wisdom from the aforesaid passage, our 
deduction is this. An issue of maintainability of a suit 
strikes at the root of the proceedings initiated by filing of 
the plaint as per requirements of Order VII Rule 1, CPC. 
If a suit is barred by law, the trial court has absolutely no 
jurisdiction to entertain and try it. However, even though a 
given case might not attract the bar envisaged by section 
9, CPC, it is obligatory for a trial court seized of a suit to 
inquire and ascertain whether the jurisdictional fact does, 
in fact, exist to enable it (the trial court) to proceed to trial 
and consider granting relief to the plaintiff as claimed. No 
higher court, much less the Supreme Court, should feel 
constrained to interfere with a decree granting relief on the 
specious ground that the parties were not put specifically 
on notice in respect of a particular line of attack/defence 
on which success/failure of the suit depends, more 
particularly an issue touching the authority of the trial 
court to grant relief if the ‘jurisdictional fact’ imperative for 
granting relief had not been satisfied. It is fundamental, 
as held in Shrisht Dhawan (supra), that assumption of 
jurisdiction/refusal to assume jurisdiction would depend on 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
569
Sangita Sinha v. Bhawana Bhardwaj and Ors.
existence of the jurisdictional fact. Irrespective of whether 
the parties have raised the contention, it is for the trial 
court to satisfy itself that adequate evidence has been led 
and all facts including the jurisdictional fact stand proved 
for relief to be granted and the suit to succeed. This is 
a duty the trial court has to discharge in its pursuit for 
rendering substantive justice to the parties, irrespective 
of whether any party to the lis has raised or not. If the 
jurisdictional fact does not exist, at the time of settling the 
issues, notice of the parties must be invited to the trial 
court’s prima facie opinion of non-existent jurisdictional 
fact touching its jurisdiction. However, failure to determine 
the jurisdictional fact, or erroneously determining it leading 
to conferment of jurisdiction, would amount to wrongful 
assumption of jurisdiction and the resultant order liable 
to be branded as ultra vires and bad.
45. Should the trial court not satisfy itself that the 
jurisdictional fact for grant of relief does exist, nothing 
prevents the court higher in the hierarchy from so satisfying 
itself. It is true that the point of maintainability of a suit has 
to looked only through the prism of section 9, CPC, and 
the court can rule on such point either upon framing of an 
issue or even prior thereto if Order VII Rule 11 (d) thereof 
is applicable. In a fit and proper case, notwithstanding 
omission of the trial court to frame an issue touching 
jurisdictional fact, the higher court would be justified in 
pronouncing its verdict upon application of the test laid 
down in Shrisht Dhawan (supra).
46. In this case, even though no issue as to maintainability 
of the suit had been framed in course of proceedings 
before the Trial Court, there was an issue as to whether 
the Agreement is true, valid and enforceable which was 
answered against the sellers. Obviously, owing to dismissal 
of the suit, the sellers did not appeal. Nevertheless, having 
regard to our findings on the point as to whether the buyer 
was ‘ready and willing’, we do not see the necessity of 
proceeding with any further discussion on the point of 
jurisdictional fact here.”
570
26.	 Since in the present case, the seller had issued a letter dated 07th 
February, 2008 cancelling the agreement to sell prior to the institution 
of the suit, the same constitutes a jurisdictional fact as till the said 
cancellation is set aside, the respondent is not entitled to the relief 
of specific performance.
27.	 Consequently, this Court is of the opinion that absent a prayer for 
declaratory relief that termination/cancellation of the agreement is 
bad in law, a suit for specific performance is not maintainable.
APPELLANT HAS THE LOCUS STANDI TO FILE THE APPEAL
28.	 The preliminary objection raised by the Respondent No.1-buyer that 
the issue of her readiness and willingness should not be examined by 
this Court as the appellant lacked the locus standi to file the present 
appeal as she did not have any right, interest or title over the subject 
property is misconceived on facts. The appellant was impleaded as 
defendant no. 3 in the subject suit as she is a beneficiary under the 
Will dated 23rd September 2002 executed by the original owner/
seller, whereby the subject property has been bequeathed in her 
favour. Consequently, the appellant, being a necessary and interested 
party to the lis, has the locus to file the present appeal. Further, the 
onus to establish readiness and willingness is on the Respondent 
No.1-buyer and the failure to establish the same disentitles the 
Respondent No.1-buyer from the equitable and discretionary relief 
of specific performance.
SUPPRESSION OF MATERIAL FACTS DISENTITLES THE BUYER 
FROM THE EQUITABLE AND DISCRETIONARY RELIEF OF 
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE 
29.	 A perusal of the record shows that not only did the Respondent No. 
1-buyer fail to seek a declaratory relief, but also it failed to disclose 
in the plaint that the seller had issued the cancellation letter dated 
7th February 2008 enclosing therewith the demand drafts dated 7th 
February 2008 and two of the three post-dated cheques. The failure 
of the Respondent No. 1-buyer to disclose the same in her plaint 
amounts to suppression of material fact, disentitling her from the 
discretionary relief of specific performance. This Court in Citadel 
Fine Pharmaceuticals v. Ramaniyam Real Estates Private Limited 
and Another (2011) 9 SCC 147 has held as under: 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
571
Sangita Sinha v. Bhawana Bhardwaj and Ors.
“57. There is another aspect of the matter also. In the 
instant case by asking for specific performance of the 
contract, the plaintiff purchaser is praying for a discretionary 
remedy. It is axiomatic that when a discretionary remedy 
is prayed for by a party, such party must come to court 
on proper disclosure of facts. The plaint which it filed 
before the court in such cases must state all the facts 
with sufficient candour and clarity. In the instant case the 
plaintiff purchaser made an averment in the plaint that the 
defendant vendor be directed to return the advance amount 
of Rs 10,00,000 with interest at the rate of 24% from the 
date of payment of the said amount till the realisation and 
an alternative prayer to that effect was also made in the 
prayer clause (c).
58. However, the fact remains that prior to the filing of the 
suit the defendant vendor returned the said amount of Rs 
10,00,000 by its letter dated 4-9-1996 by an account payee 
cheque in favour of the plaintiff and the same was sent 
to the plaintiff under registered post which was refused 
by the plaintiff on 6-9-1996. The plaintiff suppressed this 
fact in the plaint and filed the suit on 9-9-1996 with a 
totally contrary representation before the court as if the 
amount had not been returned to it by the vendor. This is 
suppression of a material fact, and disentitles the plaintiff 
purchaser from getting any discretionary relief of specific 
performance by the court.
59. In this connection we may refer to the Principle of 
Equitable Remedies by I.C.F. Spry, (4th Edn., Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1990). Dealing with the question of “clean hands” 
the learned author opined that where the plaintiff is shown 
to have materially misled the court or to have abused its 
process, or to have attempted to do so, the discretionary 
relief of specific performance can be denied to him. In 
laying down this principle, the learned author relied on a 
decision of the English Court in Armstrong v. Sheppard & 
Short Ltd. [(1959) 2 QB 384 : (1959) 3 WLR 84 : (1959) 
2 All ER 651 (CA)] , QB at p. 397. (See Spry, Equitable 
Remedies, p. 243.)
572
60. This Court has also taken the same view in Arunima 
Baruah v. Union of India [(2007) 6 SCC 120] . At p. 125, 
para 12 of the Report, this Court held that it is trite law that 
to enable the court to refuse to exercise its discretionary 
jurisdiction suppression must be of a material fact. 
This Court, of course, held that what is a material fact, 
suppression whereof would disentitle the suitor to obtain 
a discretionary relief, would depend upon the facts and 
circumstances of each case. However, by way of guidance 
this Court held that a material fact would mean that fact 
which is material for the purpose of determination of the lis.
61. Following the aforesaid tests, this Court is of the 
opinion that the suppression of the fact that the plaintiff 
refused to accept the cheque of Rs 10 lakhs sent to it by 
the defendant under registered post with acknowledgment 
due in terms of Clause 9 of the contract is a material fact. 
So on that ground the plaintiff purchaser is not entitled to 
any relief in its suit for specific performance.”
CONCLUSION
30.	 Keeping in view the aforesaid findings, this Court is of the view that 
the Agreement to Sell cannot be specifically enforced. Accordingly, 
the present appeal is allowed and the impugned Judgment dated 
27th April, 2018 as well as decrees dated 10th May, 2018 and 09th 
May, 2024 are set aside. Further, the sale deed executed in favour 
of Respondent No.1-buyer in pursuance of the impugned judgments 
is declared as null and void and the Appellant is directed to refund 
the balance sale consideration amount of Rs.24,61,000/- (Rupees 
Twenty Four Lakh Sixty One Thousand) deposited by Respondent 
No.1-buyer in pursuance to the impugned judgment and decrees.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain