[2025] 2 S.C.R. 622 : 2025 INSC 202
P.M. Lokanath and Others 
v. 
State of Karnataka and Another
(Criminal Appeal No. 2514 of 2014)
06 February 2025
[B.R. Gavai* and K. Vinod Chandran, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the initiation of criminal proceedings at the instance of 
respondent no.2 in the present case was totally activated by mala 
fide, instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance and 
with a view to spite the appellants.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.448 and 506 – Appellants had filed 
two civil suits, i.e. one for permanent injunction to prohibit 
respondent no.2 and the other for declaration of ownership of 
the suit property – Respondent no.2 filed an FIR u/ss.448 and 
506 IPC alleging that appellants had threatened respondent 
no.2 to withdraw the civil suits – Appellant sought to quash 
criminal proceedings by filing criminal petition u/s.482 of 
CrPC, which was dismissed by the High Court – Correctness:
Held: The allegations in the FIR are totally absurd – When 
respondent no.2 has not filed any suit, there is no question of 
appellants threatening him of dire consequences if he does not 
withdraw the suit – It further appears from the record that respondent 
no.2 is in the habit of filing false cases against the appellants 
and his family members – As in another criminal case No.6969 
of 2007, respondent no.2 made similar allegations against the 
appellants and his relatives, which were found to be totally false 
and appellants were acquitted – Further, brother of respondent 
no.2 filed another criminal case, PCR No.9345 of 2009, alleging 
that the sale deed on basis of which the appellant claimed title 
was fraudulently executed – The said proceedings were quashed 
by the High Court – Therefore, respondent no.2 and his relatives 
were in habit of filing false and malicious cases against appellants 
on account of long-standing civil dispute pending between them – 
* Author
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
623
P.M. Lokanath and Others v. State of Karnataka and Another
The instant case falls in the categories provided by this Court in 
the case of Bhajan Lal – The initiation of criminal proceedings 
at the instance of respondent no.2 in the present case is totally 
activated by mala fide, instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking 
vengeance and with a view to spite the appellants – Therefore, 
the continuation of the criminal proceedings against the appellants 
would be abuse of the process of law – The criminal proceedings 
against the appellants are hereby quashed. [Paras 16, 17, 18, 
19, 22, 23, 24, 25]
Case Law Cited
State of Haryana and Others v. Bhajan Lal and Others [1992] 
Supp. 3 SCR 735 : (1992) Supp. 1 SCC 335 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; 
Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Section 448 of Penal Code, 1860; Section 506 of Penal Code, 
1860; False cases; Malicious cases; Long-standing civil dispute; 
Article 226 of Constitution; Ulterior motive.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
2514 of 2014
From the Judgment and Order dated 14.11.2013 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bangalore in CRLP No. 3850 of 2010
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Anand Sanjay M Nuli, Sr. Adv., Suraj Kaushik, Varun Prasad,  
Ms. Rashika Kapoor, M/S. Nuli & Nuli.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Raghavendra M. Kulkarni, Ms. Mythili S, P. Ashok, Shiv 
Kumar, Ms. Vaishnavi, Prakash Jadhav, Ravichandra Jadhav,  
Venkata Raghu Mannepalli, V. N. Raghupathy.
624
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
B.R. Gavai, J.
1.	
The present appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 14th 
November 2013 passed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bangalore in Criminal Petition No. 3850 of 2010, 
whereby the High Court has dismissed the petition filed by the present 
appellants under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (hereinafter referred to as “Cr.P.C.”) praying thereby to quash 
proceedings registered in C.C. No.29027 of 2010 pending on the 
file of IIIrd Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bangalore (for 
short, “ACMM, Bangalore”).
2.	
A perusal of the materials placed on record would reveal that there 
is a longstanding dispute between the appellants on one hand and 
respondent No.2 and his brothers/sisters on the other hand.  The 
appellants are the absolute owners and in actual possession and 
enjoyment of the property bearing No.13 situated at Subbanna 
Char Lane, 2nd Cross, Cottonpet, Bangalore, Karnataka (hereinafter 
referred to as the “suit property”). The suit property has fallen to the 
appellants on account of them being the legal heirs of one Smt. K. 
Janakamma. Respondent No.2 and his siblings are the legal heirs 
of one Shri Narasimha Murthy, who was a party to the sale deed 
executed on 16th November 1953 whereby the suit property was 
sold to said K. Janakamma.
3.	
It appears that respondent No.2 and his siblings thereafter attempted 
to encroach upon the appellants’ suit property and as such the 
appellants filed a civil suit being O.S. No.11107/2016 in Court of 
Principal City Civil and Sessions Judge at Bangalore seeking a 
decree of permanent injunction to prohibit respondent No.2 and his 
siblings from interfering with the lawful possession and enjoyment of 
the suit property.  In the said suit, an application under Order XXXIX 
Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, “CPC”), 
also came to be filed by the appellants. In the said proceedings, the 
learned Principal City Civil and Sessions Judge, Bangalore, vide the 
judgment and order dated 19th December 2006, granted temporary 
injunction in favour of the appellants restraining respondent No.2 and 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
625
P.M. Lokanath and Others v. State of Karnataka and Another
his siblings from encroaching upon any portion of the suit/schedule 
property and from changing katha of suit property.
4.	
It further appears that the appellants thereafter filed another civil 
suit being O.S. No.1943/2008 in the Court of City Civil Judge at 
Bangalore for declaration of ownership of the suit property. 
5.	
On 25th November 2008, respondent No.2 however lodged an FIR 
under Sections 448 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for 
short, “IPC”) alleging therein that the appellants had threatened 
respondent No.2 to withdraw the civil suits. In the said FIR, it was 
further alleged that respondent No.2 was threatened by the appellants 
that in case he does not withdraw the civil suits, he will meet with 
the dire consequence of his death.
6.	
On the basis of the FIR lodged by respondent No.2, an investigation 
was carried out and a chargesheet was filed by the PSI of Cottonpet 
Police Station on 24th March 2010.
7.	
On 26th June 2010, the ACMM, Bangalore took cognizance and 
issued summons to the appellants herein.
8.	
Being aggrieved thereby, the appellants approached the High 
Court praying to quash the criminal proceedings. The learned 
Single Judge of the High Court, though noticed that there was a 
longstanding civil dispute between the parties, refused to quash 
the proceedings and dismissed the criminal petition under Section 
482 of the Cr.P.C.
9.	
Being aggrieved thereby, the appellants filed the present appeal by 
way of special leave. While issuing notice, this Court by an order 
dated 8th May 2014 stayed the proceedings before the trial court for 
three months. By an order dated 28th November 2014, while granting 
leave, the interim order of stay was made absolute by this Court.
10.	 We have heard Shri Anand Sanjay M. Nuli, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the appellants and Shri V.N. Raghupathy, learned 
counsel appearing on behalf of the State of Karnataka. Though 
respondent No.2 has been duly served, no one has entered 
appearance on his behalf.
11.	 We are informed by the counsel for the parties that appellant No.2 
(accused No.2) has died during the pendency of the proceedings. 
The appeal, therefore, stands abated qua appellant No.2.
626
Supreme Court Reports
12.	 Shri Nuli submits that the proceedings are totally mala fide. He further 
submits that it is the appellants who have filed the civil suits and, 
therefore, there is no question of respondent No.2 being threatened 
by the appellants to withdraw the suits. He further submits that 
respondent No.2 is in the habit of filing false cases as is evident from 
the material placed on record. He, therefore, prays for the quashing 
of the chargesheet and the criminal proceedings arising therefrom.
13.	 Per contra, Shri Raghupathy, learned counsel appearing for the 
respondent-State has vehemently opposed the present appeal.
14.	 From the perusal of the record, it is clear that it is the appellants, 
who have filed two civil suits, i.e. one for permanent injunction and 
the other for the declaration of the ownership of the suit property.
15.	 In the suit for permanent injunction, an order under Order XXXIX 
Rules 1 and 2 of the CPC has been passed by the Principal City Civil 
and Sessions Judge, Bangalore on 19th December 2006, thereby 
restraining respondent No.2 and his siblings from interfering with the 
physical possession of the appellants.
16.	 It is thus clear that the allegations in the FIR are totally absurd. 
When respondent No.2 has not filed any suit, there is no question 
of appellants threatening him of dire consequences if he does not 
withdraw the suit. It further appears from the record that respondent 
No.2 is in the habit of filing false cases against the appellants and 
his family members.
17.	 It can further be seen that in another criminal Case being No. 6969 
of 2007 on the file of ACMM, Bangalore filed by respondent No.2, 
there are similar allegations that the appellants and his relatives 
were threatening respondent No.2. The learned ACMM, Bangalore, 
vide judgment and order dated 29th March 2008, after considering 
the evidence placed on record found that the allegations made by 
respondent No.2 were totally false and the appellants were, therefore, 
acquitted.
18.	 Further, in another criminal case being P.C.R. No.9345 of 2009 (in 
Crime No.245 of 2009) on the file of ACMM, Bangalore filed by the 
brother of respondent No.2 against the appellants alleging that the 
sale deed on the basis of which the appellant claimed title, and the 
suit are fraudulently executed. The appellants herein had challenged 
the initiation of the said criminal proceedings before the High Court, 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
627
P.M. Lokanath and Others v. State of Karnataka and Another
praying for quashing of the said proceedings. After perusal of the 
material placed on record, learned Single Judge of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bangalore, vide the judgment and order dated 8th 
September 2009, found that the proceedings initiated were not 
sustainable and, therefore, quashed the criminal proceedings qua 
that criminal case.
19.	 We are, therefore, of the considered view that respondent No.2 
and his relatives are in the habit of filing false and malicious cases 
against the appellants only on account of long-standing civil dispute 
pending between them.
20.	 This court in the case of State of Haryana and Others v. Bhajan 
Lal and Others1 has held that the High Courts in exercise of 
extraordinary power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India 
or inherent powers under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. can prevent 
abuse of process of any court or otherwise secure ends of justice. 
This Court in paragraph 102 of the said case provided the following 
categories:
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various 
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of 
the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series 
of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary 
power under Article 226 or the inherent powers under 
Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and 
reproduced above, we give the following categories of 
cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be 
exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any 
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it 
may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined 
and sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or 
rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad 
kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised.
(1)	 Where the allegations made in the first information report 
or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value 
and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute 
any offence or make out a case against the accused.
1	
(1992) Supp. 1 SCC 335
628
Supreme Court Reports
(2)	 Where the allegations in the first information report and 
other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not 
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation 
by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except 
under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 
155(2) of the Code.
(3)	 Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR 
or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the 
same do not disclose the commission of any offence and 
make out a case against the accused.
(4)	 Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a 
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable 
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer 
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under 
Section 155(2) of the Code.
(5)	 Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so 
absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no 
prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there 
is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
(6)	 Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of 
the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under 
which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution 
and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there 
is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, 
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the 
aggrieved party.
(7)	 Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with 
mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously 
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance 
on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private 
and personal grudge.
103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that 
the power of quashing a criminal proceeding should be 
exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that 
too in the rarest of rare cases; that the court will not be 
justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability 
or genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the 
[2025] 2 S.C.R. 
629
P.M. Lokanath and Others v. State of Karnataka and Another
FIR or the complaint and that the extraordinary or inherent 
powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the court 
to act according to its whim or caprice.”
21.	 This Court, however, gave a note of caution that such powers should 
be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too in 
rarest of rare cases.
22.	 We are therefore of the considered view that the present case would 
squarely fall under points 1, 3, 5 and 7 of paragraph 102 of the 
aforesaid categories provided by this Court in the case of Bhajan 
Lal (supra).
23.	 The initiation of criminal proceedings at the instance of respondent 
No.2 in the present case is totally activated by mala fide, instituted 
with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance and with a view to 
spite the appellants.
24.	 We, therefore, find that the continuation of the criminal proceedings 
against the appellants would be nothing else but an abuse of the 
process of law.
25.	 The appeal is, accordingly, allowed. The impugned judgment and 
order dated 14th November 2013 passed by the learned Single Judge 
of the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore, is quashed and set 
aside. The chargesheet registered as C.C. No. 29027/2010 before 
the Court of IIIrd Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bangalore, the 
order dated 26th June 2010 issuing summons to the appellants and 
the subsequent proceedings arising therefrom, are also quashed 
and set aside.
26.	 Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan