[2025] 11 S.C.R. 291 : 2025 INSC 1288
Mihir Rajesh Shah 
v. 
State of Maharashtra and Another
(Criminal Appeal No. 2195 of 2025)
06 November 2025
[B.R. Gavai, CJI and Augustine George Masih,* J.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether in each and every case, even arising out of an offence 
under Penal Code, 1860 now Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 
would it be necessary to furnish grounds of arrest to an accused 
either before arrest or forthwith after arrest; whether, even in 
exceptional cases, where on account of certain exigencies it will not 
be possible to furnish the grounds of arrest either before arrest or 
immediately after arrest, the arrest would be vitiated on the ground of 
non-compliance with the provisions of Section 50 of the CrPC 
1973 (now Section 47 of BNSS 2023).
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – Constitutional mandate of – 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.50 – Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 – s.47 – Whether in each and every 
case, even arising out of an offence under Penal Code, 1860 
now Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 would it be necessary to 
furnish grounds of arrest to an accused either before arrest 
or forthwith after arrest:
Held: Constitutional mandate of informing the arrestee the grounds 
of arrest is mandatory in all offences under all statutes including 
offences under IPC 1860 (now BNS 2023) – The grounds of arrest 
must be communicated in writing to the arrestee in the language 
he/she understands – In case(s) where, the arresting officer/
person is unable to communicate the grounds of arrest in writing 
on or soon after arrest, it be so done orally – The said grounds be 
communicated in writing within a reasonable time and in any case 
at least two hours prior to production of the arrestee for remand 
proceedings before the magistrate – In case of non-compliance, 
the arrest and subsequent remand would be rendered illegal and 
the person will be at liberty to be set free – The requirement of 
* Author
292
Supreme Court Reports
informing the arrested person the grounds of arrest, in the light of 
and u/Art.22(1) of the Constitution of India, is not a mere formality 
but a mandatory binding constitutional safeguard included in Part III 
of the Constitution under the head of Fundamental Rights – Thus, 
if a person is not informed of the grounds of his arrest as soon as 
maybe, it would amount to the violation of his fundamental rights 
curtailing his right to life and personal liberty u/Art.21, rendering 
the arrest illegal. [Paras 56, 40]
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 – s.50 – Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 – 
s.47 – Whether, even in exceptional cases, where on account of 
certain exigencies it will not be possible to furnish the grounds 
of arrest either before arrest or immediately after arrest, the 
arrest would be vitiated on the ground of non-compliance with 
the provisions of Section 50 of the CrPC 1973 (now Section 
47 of BNSS 2023):
Held: Non-supply of grounds of arrest in writing to the arrestee 
prior to or immediately after arrest would not vitiate such arrest on 
the grounds of non-compliance with the provisions of s.50 of the 
CrPC 1973 (now s.47 of BNSS 2023) provided the said grounds 
are supplied in writing within a reasonable time and in any case two 
hours prior to the production of the arrestee before the magistrate 
for remand proceedings – In cases where the police are already in 
possession of documentary material furnishing a cogent basis for 
the arrest, the written grounds of arrest must be furnished to the 
arrestee on his arrest – However, in exceptional circumstances such 
as offences against body or property committed in flagrante delicto, 
where informing the grounds of arrest in writing on arrest is rendered 
impractical, it shall be sufficient for the police officer or other person 
making the arrest to orally convey the same to the person at the 
time of arrest – Later, a written copy of grounds of arrest must be 
supplied to the arrested person within a reasonable time and in no 
event later than two hours prior to production of the arrestee before 
the magistrate for remand proceedings – The remand papers shall 
contain the grounds of arrest and in case there is delay in supply 
thereof, a note indicating a cause for it be included for the information 
of the magistrate – Two-hour threshold before production for remand 
strikes a judicious balance between safeguarding the arrestee’s 
constitutional rights u/Art.22(1) and preserving the operational 
continuity of criminal investigations. [Paras 52-54]
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
293
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – Constitutional mandate under, 
not a mere procedural formality but a constitutional safeguard 
in the form of fundamental rights – Intent and purpose of the 
constitutional mandate, explained – Mode of communicating 
the grounds of arrest to serve the intended purpose – Art.22(1) 
not to be read in a restrictive manner:
Held: Mere communication of the grounds in a language not 
understood by the person arrested does not fulfil the constitutional 
mandate under Article 22 of the Constitution of India – Failure to 
supply such grounds in a language understood by the arrestee 
renders the constitutional safeguards illusory and infringes the 
personal liberty of the person as guaranteed under Article 21 and 
22 of the Constitution of India – To achieve the intended objective 
of the constitutional mandate of Article 22(1) of the Constitution 
of India, the grounds of arrest must be informed to the arrested 
person in each and every case without exception and the mode 
of the communication of such grounds must be in writing in the 
language he understands. [Paras 42-46]
Constitution of India – Arts.22(1), 21 – Constitutional mandate 
of – Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.50 – Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 – s.47 – Appellant-accused 
challenged the legality of his arrest in a case when a BMW 
car driven by him at a high speed collided violently with the 
complainant’s scooter leading to his wife succumbing to the 
severe injuries – Appellant contended that the grounds of 
arrest were not furnished in writing as mandated by Art.22(1) 
of the Constitution of India and s.47 of BNSS 2023 equivalent 
to s.50 of CrPC 1973 – High Court despite the acknowledgment 
of this procedural lapse, upheld the validity of arrest due to 
the Appellant’s conscious awareness of the gravity of the 
offence, supported by substantial evidence and the Appellant’s 
evasion of arrest, justifying custody despite the missing 
written grounds:
Held: The requirement of informing the arrested person the grounds 
of arrest, in the light of and u/Art.22(1) of the Constitution of India, 
is not a mere formality but a mandatory binding constitutional 
safeguard included in Part III of the Constitution under the head 
of Fundamental Rights – Thus, if a person is not informed of the 
294
Supreme Court Reports
grounds of his arrest as soon as maybe, it would amount to the 
violation of his fundamental rights curtailing his right to life and 
personal liberty u/Art.21, rendering the arrest illegal – Petition not 
entertained on merits, notice was issued only to settle the issues 
to bring about clarity thereon – In connected cases, by way of 
ad interim relief, the Appellants were directed to be released on 
bail during pendency of these Appeals, the same shall continue. 
[Paras 40, 59, 60]
Constitution of India – Art.22(1) – Constitutional mandate of – 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.50 – Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 – s.47 – Constitutional mandate and 
statutory provisions giving effect to the constitutional mandate 
in Article 22 of the Constitution of India; jurisprudential 
developments and impact of arrest on a person, discussed. 
[Paras 17-31]
Case Law Cited
Pankaj Bansal v. Union of India and Others [2023] 12 SCR 714 : 
(2024) 7 SCC 576; Prabir Purkayastha v. State (NCT of Delhi 
[2024] 6 SCR 666 : (2024) 8 SCC 254; Vihaan Kumar v. State 
of Haryana and Another [2025] 2 SCR 424 : (2025) 5 SCC 799; 
Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar and Another [2014] 8 SCR 128 : 
(2014) 8 SCC 273; Joginder Kumar v. State of U.P. and Others 
[1994] 3 SCR 661 : (1994) 4 SCC 260; Suhas Chakma v. Union 
of India and Others [2024] 10 SCR 1769 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 
3031; Ashok v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2025) 2 SCC 381; Manubhai 
Ratilal Patel v. State of Gujarat and Others [2012] 8 SCR 993 : 
(2013) 1 SCC 314; Lallubhai Jogibhai Patel v. Union of India and 
Others [1981] 2 SCR 352 : (1981) 2 SCC 427 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; Penal Code, 1860; Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
List of Keywords
Grounds of arrest; Necessary to furnish grounds of arrest to an 
accused; Informing the arrestee the grounds of arrest is mandatory 
in all offences; Grounds of arrest to be communicated in writing; In 
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
295
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
the language arrestee understands; Right to life and personal liberty 
under Article 21 of Constitution of India; Arrest illegal; Article 22(1) 
of Constitution of India; Section 50 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973; Section 47 of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
2195 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.11.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in CRWP Nos. 3533 of 2024
With
Criminal Appeal No(s). 2189 and 2190 of 2025 and SLP (Crl.) 
No. 8704 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Shri Singh, Ms. Tusharika Mattoo, Siddharth Satija, Abhinav Sekhri, 
Amicus Curiaes.
Advs. for the Appellant:
Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Vikram Chaudhri, Sr. Advs., 
Siddharth Sharma, Jay Bhardwaj, Ms. Disha Bajaj, Rishi Bhuta, 
Ms. Ishika Chauhan, Rishi Sehgal, Nikhil Jain, Ms. Arveen Sekhon, 
Ms. Muskaan Khurana, Karl P. Rustomkhan, Vaibhav Jagtap, 
Ashish Pandey, Shubham Saxena, Anmol Goyal, Pushkar Dwivedi, 
Akshit Chauhan.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Ms. Rukhmini Bobde, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Aaditya Aniruddha 
Pande, Ms. Soumya Priyadarshinee, Vinayak Aren, Amlaan Kumar, 
Jatin Dhamija, Naveen Kumar Bhardwaj.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Augustine George Masih, J.
1.	
These Appeals being Criminal Appeal No.2195 of 2025, Criminal 
Appeal No.2189 of 2025 and Criminal Appeal No.2190 of 2025 
were originally filed as Special Leave Petitions where leave was 
296
Supreme Court Reports
granted vide Order dated 22.04.2025. Since, in all these Appeals 
similar questions of law are involved, they are being decided by 
this common judgment. Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.8704 
of 2025 was tagged with the above-mentioned matters vide Order 
dated 02.06.2025.
2.	
The main issue as raised by the Appellants in these Appeals is the 
violation of the Appellants’ right under Article 22(1) of the Constitution 
of India and Section 50 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(“CrPC 1973”) now Section 47 of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 
2023 (“BNSS 2023”) as the appellants assert that they were not 
informed of grounds of their arrest in writing.
3.	
For convenience, Criminal Appeal No. 2195 of 2025 is taken as 
the lead case. The facts in a nutshell are that on 07.07.2024, a 
white BMW car, driven at a high speed, collided violently with 
the complainant’s scooter from behind. The force of the impact 
propelled both the complainant and his wife onto the car’s bonnet, 
whereby the complainant was thrown to the side, and tragically, his 
wife became ensnared between the vehicle’s front left wheel and 
bumper. Notwithstanding this grievous state, the driver, alleged 
to be Mihir Rajesh Shah, the Appellant herein, persisted in his 
reckless flight, dragging the victim, thereafter absconding without 
rendering assistance or reporting the incident to authorities. The 
victim succumbed to the severe injuries sustained in this collision, as 
medically confirmed, while the complainant sustained minor injuries. 
FIR No. 378/2024 was registered at Worli Police Station under the 
relevant provisions of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (“BNS 2023”), 
and the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. Initial investigative steps included 
the identification of the offending vehicle through CCTV footage, and 
the discovery near Kalanagar Junction Flyover of the damaged BMW 
alongside Rajrishi Rajendra Singh Bindawat and Rajesh Shah, father 
of Mihir Rajesh Shah (hereinafter, “Appellant”). Arrests soon followed, 
with co-accused Rajrishi Rajendra Singh Bindawat being taken into 
custody on the same day and Mihir Rajesh Shah being apprehended 
on 09.07.2024. The evidence collected firmly established the Appellant 
as the driver at the material time, including CCTV footage capturing 
his presence at the wheel, consumption of alcohol shortly before the 
incident, an attempt to alter his appearance, and use of a Fastag 
registered in his name, amongst other incriminating particulars.
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
297
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
4.	
The remand proceedings saw the Appellant being produced before 
the Judicial Magistrate First Class with initial police custody extending 
subsequently into judicial custody; a course contested on the grounds 
that the grounds of arrest were not furnished in writing as mandated 
by Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India and Section 47 of BNSS 
2023 equivalent to Section 50 of CrPC 1973.
5.	
The Appellant’s challenge against the legality of arrest was ultimately 
considered by the High Court of Bombay in Criminal Writ Petition 
No. 3533 of 2024 wherein, vide Judgment dated 25.11.2024, the 
High Court of Bombay, notwithstanding the acknowledgment of this 
procedural lapse, upheld the validity of arrest due to the Appellant’s 
conscious awareness of the gravity of the offence, supported by 
substantial evidence and the Appellant’s evasion of arrest, thereby 
justifying custody despite the missing written grounds. The Appel-
lant approached this Court challenging the Judgment of Bombay 
High Court contending that grounds of arrest as mandated under 
Section 47 of BNSS 2023 were not informed to him in writing.
6.	
This Court, while considering the Special Leave Petition recorded 
that the Court is not inclined to entertain the petition on its merits and 
issued notice only to the extent of considering the question of law/
legal position. In connected cases, being Criminal Appeal No. 2189 
of 2025 and Criminal Appeal No. 2190 of 2025, this Court vide Order 
dated 22.04.2025, has granted ad interim relief and directed the Ap-
pellants to be released on bail during pendency of these Appeals. 
In Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 8704 of 2025 vide Order 
dated 02.06.2025, ad interim relief was also granted to the Petitioner 
therein directing his release on bail. On 13.12.2024, Mr. Shri Singh, 
learned counsel, who was present in the Court was appointed as 
Amicus Curiae to assist this Court in this matter.
7.	
Then, while granting leave on 22.04.2025, this Court formulated the 
following questions of law for consideration:
(a)	 Whether in each and every case, even arising out of an 
offence under Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC 1860”) now 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS 2023) would it be 
necessary to furnish grounds of arrest to an accused either 
before arrest or forthwith after arrest, and
(b)	 Whether, even in exceptional cases, where on account 
of certain exigencies it will not be possible to furnish the 
298
Supreme Court Reports
grounds of arrest either before arrest or immediately after 
arrest, the arrest would be vitiated on the ground of non-
compliance with the provisions of Section 50 of the CrPC 
1973 (now Section 47 of BNSS 2023).
8.	
Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Appellant submits that the 
action of the Respondent of arresting the Appellant without informing 
the grounds of arrest is in gross violation of the constitutional protection 
and mandate of Article 21 and Article 22(1) of the Constitution of 
India and Section 47 of BNSS 2023. He substantiates his contention 
relying upon the decision of this Court in Pankaj Bansal v. Union 
of India and Others1, contending that this Court has clearly held 
that to meet the requirement of Article 22(1) of the Constitution of 
India, the mode of conveying the grounds of arrest must necessarily 
be meaningful so as to serve the intended purpose and therefore it 
must be furnished to the arrestee in writing as a matter of course.
9.	
Reliance is also placed upon the decision of this Court in Prabir 
Purkayastha v. State (NCT of Delhi)2, wherein while dealing with 
the issue of communication of grounds of arrest to the arrestee in 
the offences related to the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 
(“UAPA”), this Court relying upon Pankaj Bansal (supra) reiterated 
that the grounds of arrest shall be furnished to the person arrested 
under UAPA or any other offence in writing without any exception 
at the earliest.
10.	 He further relies upon the decision of this Court in Vihaan Kumar v. 
State of Haryana and Another3, wherein it was held that the 
requirement of informing a person arrested, of grounds of arrest 
is a mandatory requirement of Article 22(1) of the Constitution of 
India and it must be conveyed in such a mode and method so as to 
achieve the object of the constitutional safeguard. He contends that 
Article 22 of the Constitution of India does not differentiate between 
offences under BNS 2023 (earlier IPC 1860) or offences under any 
other special statute such as UAPA, thereby claiming violation of 
Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India and Section 47 of BNSS 
2023 by the Respondent. He, therefore, prays for the arrest to be 
declared illegal and the Appellant to be set at liberty.
1	
(2024) 7 SCC 576 : 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1244
2	
(2024) 8 SCC 254 
3	
(2025) 5 SCC 799 : 2025 SCC OnLine SC 269
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
299
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
11.	 On the other hand, learned Counsel for the Respondent-State 
submits that the mode of communication of grounds of arrest is not 
specified in the provision of Section 47 of BNSS 2023. The reliance 
on the decisions in the cases of Pankaj Bansal (supra) and Prabir 
Purkayastha (supra), is misplaced as both the cases pertain to 
special statutes and the facts therein are not similar to the present 
case. It is argued that the mandate of Article 22(1) is to inform the 
grounds of arrest to the arrestee and there is no specific statutory 
mandate to provide such grounds in writing. The Respondent while 
supporting the Judgment of the High Court of Bombay contends that 
while informing grounds of arrest to the arrestee is mandatory, the 
mode thereof is not specified, and hence, the Appellant has been 
arrested in consonance with law and by following all procedural 
safeguards.
12.	 Learned Amicus Curiae submits that the grounds of arrest must 
be communicated to the arrested person in all cases without any 
exception regardless of the nature of offences i.e. offences under 
BNS 2023 (IPC 1860) or under any special statute such as UAPA 
etc. irrespective of the mode of conveying/ communication specified 
or not in the statute. Reliance is placed upon Pankaj Bansal (supra) 
and Prabir Purkayastha (supra) for submitting that even the special 
statutes do not provide for an exception from informing grounds of 
arrest.
13.	 Further, regarding the mode of informing the grounds of arrest, learned 
Amicus Curiae submits that Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India 
as well as the procedural law under BNSS 2023 (CrPC 1973) do not 
make it mandatory to provide such grounds in writing to the arrestee. 
He submits that as long as the remand court or any other court is 
convinced that the grounds of arrest have been duly communicated, 
the mandate under Article 22(1) and BNSS 2023 would stand 
satisfied. This Court in Pankaj Bansal (supra) observed that ideally 
grounds of arrest should be informed in writing, however, in Vihaan 
Kumar (supra) it was acknowledged that it might not be practical to 
provide grounds of arrest to an accused in each and every case in 
writing and thus clarified that there is no mandate to communicate 
the grounds of arrest in writing. Nevertheless, for investigations 
under special statutes such as Prevention of Money Laundering 
Act, 2002 (“PMLA”) or UAPA, this Court has specifically held that 
such grounds of arrest be communicated in writing. The decisions in 
300
Supreme Court Reports
cases of Pankaj Bansal (supra) and Prabir Purkayastha (supra) 
need to be read harmoniously with Vihaan Kumar (supra) which 
provides as a general rule that grounds of arrest are not mandated 
to be communicated in writing. 
14.	 On the aspect of timeframe within which grounds of arrest must 
be supplied to the arrested person, he submits that there is no 
straightjacket formula regarding the timeframe within which grounds 
of arrest must be communicated/supplied to the arrested person. The 
law provides that the grounds of arrest ought to be communicated at 
the time of arrest or at the earliest possible instance. The grounds of 
arrest must be provided forthwith i.e. within a reasonable time so as 
to allow the arrested accused an effective opportunity to consult a 
legal practitioner and be sufficiently prepared to oppose remand. The 
reasonable time would depend on the facts of each case; however, 
the grounds must be provided prior to the remand hearing.
15.	 Learned Amicus Curiae rests his submissions by stating that there 
can be no doubt that non-communication of the grounds of arrest to 
the arrested person amounts to the violation of Article 22(1) of the 
Constitution of India, entitling the arrestee to be released from the 
custody. However, there can be no absolute rule that if an arrest is 
found to be contrary to law, all investigative procedures linked to the 
arrest must be deemed to have been vitiated. The effect of failure to 
communicate grounds of arrest would have to be seen in the context 
of proceedings when such an objection is raised and the nature of 
investigation conducted after the arrest of the accused.
16.	 Having heard the learned Counsels for the parties, learned Amicus 
Curiae and on perusal of the material on record, we find it apposite 
that prior to undertaking and answering the aforementioned issues, 
it is imperative to delve into the constitutional mandate and statutory 
provisions relatable to informing of grounds of arrest to the arrested 
person as well as the existing jurisprudence as developed by this 
Court while dealing with such provisions.
17.	 The genesis of informing the grounds of arrest to a person flows from 
the Constitutional safeguard provided in Article 21 of the Constitution 
of India, which reads “No person shall be deprived of his life or 
personal liberty except according to procedure established by law”. 
The expression ‘personal liberty’ has been given a wide meaning 
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
301
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
through various judicial pronouncements. One of which is that 
personal liberty includes procedural safeguards from the abuse of 
power by the State agencies and scrutiny of the actions of the State.
18.	 Article 22 of the Constitution of India further strengthens the protection 
of personal liberty of a person by providing that a person arrested 
must be informed of the grounds of his arrest at the earliest and 
should not be detained without informing him of such grounds. Article 
22 reads as follow:
“22. Protection against arrest and detention in certain 
cases.—(1) No person who is arrested shall be detained 
in custody without being informed, as soon as may be, 
of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the 
right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner 
of his choice.
(2) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody 
shall be produced before the nearest magistrate within a 
period of twenty-four hours of such arrest excluding the 
time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to 
the court of the magistrate and no such person shall be 
detained in custody beyond the said period without the 
authority of a magistrate.
(3) Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) shall apply—
(a) to any person who for the time being is an enemy 
alien; or
(b) to any person who is arrested or detained under 
any law providing for preventive detention.
(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise 
the detention of a person for a longer period than three 
months unless—
(a) an Advisory Board consisting of persons who 
are, or have been, or are qualified to be appointed 
as, Judges of a High Court has reported before the 
expiration of the said period of three months that there 
is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention:
Provided that nothing in this sub-clause shall authorise 
the detention of any person beyond the maximum 
302
Supreme Court Reports
period prescribed by any law made by Parliament 
under sub-clause (b) of clause (7); or
(b) such person is detained in accordance with the 
provisions of any law made by Parliament under 
sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (7).
(5) When any person is detained in pursuance of an order 
made under any law providing for preventive detention, 
the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, 
communicate to such person the grounds on which the 
order has been made and shall afford him the earliest 
opportunity of making a representation against the order.
(6) Nothing in clause (5) shall require the authority making 
any such order as is referred to in that clause to disclose 
facts which such authority considers to be against the 
public interest to disclose.
(7) Parliament may by law prescribe—
(a) the circumstances under which, and the class or 
classes of cases in which, a person may be detained 
for a period longer than three months under any law 
providing for preventive detention without obtaining 
the opinion of an Advisory Board in accordance with 
the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (4);
(b) the maximum period for which any person may 
in any class or classes of cases be detained under 
any law providing for preventive detention; and
(c) the procedure to be followed by an Advisory Board 
in an inquiry under sub-clause (a) of clause (4).”
19.	 The Constitutional safeguard provided under Article 22 of the 
Constitution of India has been effectuated by the legislature by 
incorporating Section 50 of CrPC 1973 (now Section 47 of BNSS 
2023) which puts into force the procedural mandate providing for 
the protection of the personal liberty of the person so arrested. 
Section 47 of BNSS 2023 casts a duty on the police officer or other 
person arresting any person without a warrant shall communicate 
him the grounds of arrest, which is reproduced herein below:
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
303
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
“47. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of 
arrest and of right to bail.––(1) Every police officer or 
other person arresting any person without warrant shall 
forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the offence 
for which he is arrested or other grounds for such arrest.
(2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any 
person other than a person accused of a non-bailable 
offence, he shall inform the person arrested that he is 
entitled to be released on bail and that he may arrange 
for sureties on his behalf.”
20.	 Section 50A of the CrPC 1973 now Section 48 of BNSS 2023 was 
further added to extend the scope of such protection by casting a 
duty upon the person arresting to inform such grounds of arrest to 
his friend, relative or any other person nominated by arrested person. 
Section 48 of BNSS 2023 reads as follows:
“48. Obligation of person making arrest to inform 
about arrest, etc., to relative or friend.–– (1) Every 
police officer or other person making any arrest under this 
Sanhita shall forthwith give the information regarding such 
arrest and place where the arrested person is being held 
to any of his relatives, friends or such other persons as 
may be disclosed or nominated by the arrested person 
for the purpose of giving such information and also to the 
designated police officer in the district.
(2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of 
his rights under sub-section (1) as soon as he is brought 
to the police station.
(3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the 
arrest of such person shall be made in a book to be kept 
in the police station in such form as the State Government 
may, by rules, provide.
(4) It shall be the duty of the Magistrate before whom such 
arrested person is produced, to satisfy himself that the 
requirements of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) have 
been complied with in respect of such arrested person.”
21.	 After having discussed the constitutional mandate and statutory 
provisions giving effect to the constitutional mandate in Article 22 
304
Supreme Court Reports
of the Constitution of India, let us now consider the jurisprudence 
developed by this Court with respect to furnishing of grounds of 
arrest through its decisions.
22.	 In Pankaj Bansal (supra), this Court while dealing with the issue 
of furnishing grounds of arrest under Section 19(1) of PMLA has 
underscored that Article 22(1) of the Constitution mandates that 
no arrested person shall be detained without being informed of the 
grounds of such arrest at the earliest opportunity. The manner in 
which such grounds are to be communicated must be efficacious 
and substantive which must fulfil the essential objective and mandate 
of the constitutional provisions. It was further held that there exists 
no plausible justification as to why a written copy of the grounds of 
arrest ought not be provided to the arrestee as a standard procedural 
requirement without any exception.
23.	 This Court has reached the above conclusion based on the proposition 
that mere oral communication of such grounds, in the absence of 
any written document, renders the compliance susceptible to factual 
disputes which often result into conflicting claims between the 
arrested person and the investigating agency. This conflict results 
in jeopardizing the integrity of the arrest process and thereby giving 
an opportunity to the accused person to claim an immediate release. 
This situation may be obviated by furnishing the grounds of arrest 
in writing. Apart from the practical difficulties, furnishing grounds of 
arrest in writing also results into effective compliance of the mandate 
provided under Article 22 of the Constitution of India. The relevant 
portion of the decision in Pankaj Bansal (supra) is reproduced herein:
“38. In this regard, we may note that Article 22(1) of 
the Constitution provides, inter alia, that no person who 
is arrested shall be detained in custody without being 
informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such 
arrest. This being the fundamental right guaranteed to 
the arrested person, the mode of conveying information 
of the grounds of arrest must necessarily be meaningful 
so as to serve the intended purpose. It may be noted 
that Section 45 PMLA enables the person arrested under 
Section 19 thereof to seek release on bail but it postulates 
that unless the twin conditions prescribed thereunder are 
satisfied, such a person would not be entitled to grant of 
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
305
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
bail. The twin conditions set out in the provision are that, 
firstly, the court must be satisfied, after giving an opportunity 
to the Public Prosecutor to oppose the application for 
release, that there are reasonable grounds to believe 
that the arrested person is not guilty of the offence and, 
secondly, that he is not likely to commit any offence while 
on bail. To meet this requirement, it would be essential for 
the arrested person to be aware of the grounds on which 
the authorised officer arrested him/her under Section 19 
and the basis for the officer’s “reason to believe” that he/
she is guilty of an offence punishable under the 2002 Act. 
It is only if the arrested person has knowledge of these 
facts that he/she would be in a position to plead and prove 
before the Special Court that there are grounds to believe 
that he/she is not guilty of such offence, so as to avail the 
relief of bail. Therefore, communication of the grounds of 
arrest, as mandated by Article 22(1) of the Constitution and 
Section 19 PMLA, is meant to serve this higher purpose 
and must be given due importance.
***
***
***
42. That being so, there is no valid reason as to why a copy 
of such written grounds of arrest should not be furnished 
to the arrested person as a matter of course and without 
exception. There are two primary reasons as to why this 
would be the advisable course of action to be followed as 
a matter of principle. Firstly, in the event such grounds of 
arrest are orally read out to the arrested person or read by 
such person with nothing further and this fact is disputed in 
a given case, it may boil down to the word of the arrested 
person against the word of the authorised officer as to 
whether or not there is due and proper compliance in this 
regard. In the case on hand, that is the situation insofar 
as Basant Bansal is concerned. Though ED claims that 
witnesses were present and certified that the grounds of 
arrest were read out and explained to him in Hindi, that 
is neither here nor there as he did not sign the document. 
Non-compliance in this regard would entail release of the 
arrested person straightaway, as held in V. Senthil Balaji v. 
306
Supreme Court Reports
State [(2024) 3 SCC 51 : (2024) 2 SCC (Cri) 1]. Such a 
precarious situation is easily avoided and the consequence 
thereof can be obviated very simply by furnishing the written 
grounds of arrest, as recorded by the authorised officer 
in terms of Section 19(1) PMLA, to the arrested person 
under due acknowledgment, instead of leaving it to the 
debatable ipse dixit of the authorised officer.
43. The second reason as to why this would be the proper 
course to adopt is the constitutional objective underlying 
such information being given to the arrested person. 
Conveyance of this information is not only to apprise the 
arrested person of why he/she is being arrested but also to 
enable such person to seek legal counsel and, thereafter, 
present a case before the court under Section 45 to seek 
release on bail, if he/she so chooses. In this regard, the 
grounds of arrest in V. Senthil Balaji v. State [(2024) 3 SCC 
51 : (2024) 2 SCC (Cri) 1], are placed on record and we find 
that the same run into as many as six pages. The grounds 
of arrest recorded in the case on hand in relation to Pankaj 
Bansal and Basant Bansal have not been produced before 
this Court, but it was contended that they were produced 
at the time of remand. However, as already noted earlier, 
this did not serve the intended purpose. Further, in the 
event their grounds of arrest were equally voluminous, it 
would be well-nigh impossible for either Pankaj Bansal or 
Basant Bansal to record and remember all that they had 
read or heard being read out for future recall so as to avail 
legal remedies. More so, as a person who has just been 
arrested would not be in a calm and collected frame of 
mind and may be utterly incapable of remembering the 
contents of the grounds of arrest read by or read out to him/
her. The very purpose of this constitutional and statutory 
protection would be rendered nugatory by permitting the 
authorities concerned to merely read out or permit reading 
of the grounds of arrest, irrespective of their length and 
detail, and claim due compliance with the constitutional 
requirement under Article 22(1) and the statutory mandate 
under Section 19(1) PMLA.
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
307
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
44. We may also note that the grounds of arrest recorded 
by the authorised officer, in terms of Section 19(1) PMLA, 
would be personal to the person who is arrested and 
there should, ordinarily, be no risk of sensitive material 
being divulged therefrom, compromising the sanctity and 
integrity of the investigation. In the event any such sensitive 
material finds mention in such grounds of arrest recorded 
by the authorised officer, it would always be open to him to 
redact such sensitive portions in the document and furnish 
the edited copy of the grounds of arrest to the arrested 
person, so as to safeguard the sanctity of the investigation.
45. On the above analysis, to give true meaning and 
purpose to the constitutional and the statutory mandate 
of Section 19(1) PMLA of informing the arrested person of 
the grounds of arrest, we hold that it would be necessary, 
henceforth, that a copy of such written grounds of arrest 
is furnished to the arrested person as a matter of course 
and without exception. The decisions of the Delhi High 
Court in  Moin Akhtar Qureshi  v.  Union of India [2017 
SCC OnLine Del 12108] and the Bombay High Court 
in Chhagan Chandrakant Bhujbal v. Union of India [2016 
SCC OnLine Bom 9938 : (2017) 1 AIR Bom R (Cri) 929], 
which hold to the contrary, do not lay down the correct 
law. In the case on hand, the admitted position is that 
ED›s investigating officer merely read out or permitted 
reading of the grounds of arrest of the appellants and 
left it at that, which is also disputed by the appellants. As 
this form of communication is not found to be adequate 
to fulfil compliance with the mandate of Article 22(1) of 
the Constitution and Section 19(1) PMLA, we have no 
hesitation in holding that their arrest was not in keeping 
with the provisions of Section 19(1) PMLA. Further, as 
already noted supra, the clandestine conduct of ED in 
proceeding against the appellants, by recording the second 
ECIR immediately after they secured interim protection in 
relation to the first ECIR, does not commend acceptance 
as it reeks of arbitrary exercise of power. In effect, the 
arrest of the appellants and, in consequence, their remand 
to the custody of ED and, thereafter, to judicial custody, 
cannot be sustained.”
308
Supreme Court Reports
24.	 In Prabir Purkayastha (supra), of which, one of us was a member 
(B.R. Gavai, J., as he then was), this Court reiterated the principle 
laid down in the above judgment, while dealing with offences under 
UAPA and held that any individual arrested for alleged commission 
of offences under the UAPA or any other offence for that matter, has 
both a fundamental and a statutory right to be informed in writing such 
grounds of arrest. The Court further held that a copy of such written 
grounds must be furnished to the arrested person at the earliest 
without any exception observing that the communication provided 
under Article 22 and Section 50 of CrPC 1973 (now Section 47 of 
BNSS 2023) is not a mere procedural formality but a vital safeguard 
with the ultimate objective to enable the arrested person to effectively 
consult legal aid and be prepared to raise objections in remand 
hearing and apply for his/her bail. The right to life and personal liberty, 
safeguarded under Articles 20, 21 and 22 of the Constitution, stands 
as the paramount fundamental right. Accordingly, infringement of 
these constitutional protections commands rigorous judicial scrutiny 
and strict enforcement.
25.	 It was said that any breach of the constitutional safeguards provided 
under Article 22 would vitiate the lawfulness of arrest and subsequent 
remand and entitle the arrested person to be set at liberty. The 
relevant portion in Prabir Purkayastha (supra) is reproduced herein:
“19. Resultantly, there is no doubt in the mind of the court 
that any person arrested for allegation of commission of 
offences under the provisions of UAPA or for that matter 
any other offence(s) has a fundamental and a statutory 
right to be informed about the grounds of arrest in writing 
and a copy of such written grounds of arrest have to be 
furnished to the arrested person as a matter of course and 
without exception at the earliest. The purpose of informing 
to the arrested person the grounds of arrest is salutary 
and sacrosanct inasmuch as this information would be the 
only effective means for the arrested person to consult his 
advocate; oppose the police custody remand and to seek 
bail. Any other interpretation would tantamount to diluting 
the sanctity of the fundamental right guaranteed under 
Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India.
20. The right to life and personal liberty is the most 
sacrosanct fundamental right guaranteed under Articles 
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
309
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
20, 21 and 22 of the Constitution of India. Any attempt to 
encroach upon this fundamental right has been frowned 
upon by this Court in a catena of decisions. In this regard, 
we may refer to the following observations made by this 
Court in Roy V.D. v. State of Kerala [(2000) 8 SCC 590 : 
2001 SCC (Cri) 42] : (SCC p. 593, para 7)
‘7. The life and liberty of an individual is so sacrosanct 
that it cannot be allowed to be interfered with except 
under the authority of law. It is a principle which has 
been recognised and applied in all civilised countries. 
In our Constitution Article 21 guarantees protection of 
life and personal liberty not only to citizens of India 
but also to aliens.’
Thus, any attempt to violate such fundamental right, 
guaranteed by Articles 20, 21 and 22 of the Constitution 
of India, would have to be dealt with strictly.
21. The right to be informed about the grounds of arrest 
flows from Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India and 
any infringement of this fundamental right would vitiate the 
process of arrest and remand. Mere fact that a charge-
sheet has been filed in the matter, would not validate the 
illegality and the unconstitutionality committed at the time 
of arresting the accused and the grant of initial police 
custody remand to the accused.
***
***
***
28. The language used in Article 22(1) and Article 22(5) 
of the Constitution of India regarding the communication 
of the grounds is exactly the identical. Neither of the 
constitutional provisions require that the “grounds” of 
“arrest” or “detention”, as the case may be, must be 
communicated in writing. Thus, interpretation to this 
important facet of the fundamental right as made by the 
Constitution Bench while examining the scope of Article 
22(5) of the Constitution of India would ipso facto apply 
to Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India insofar as the 
requirement to communicate the grounds of arrest is 
concerned.
310
Supreme Court Reports
29. Hence, we have no hesitation in reiterating that the 
requirement to communicate the grounds of arrest or 
the grounds of detention in writing to a person arrested 
in connection with an offence or a person placed under 
preventive detention as provided under Articles 22(1) and 
22(5) of the Constitution of India is sacrosanct and cannot 
be breached under any situation. Non-compliance of this 
constitutional requirement and statutory mandate would 
lead to the custody or the detention being rendered illegal, 
as the case may be.”
26.	 Subsequently, in Vihaan Kumar (supra), this Court underscored that 
a failure to comply with the requirement of informing the grounds of 
arrest soon after the arrest would render the arrest illegal. The Court 
referred to the above-mentioned decisions of this Court and observed 
that although the ideal mode of communication of grounds of arrest 
is to provide such grounds in writing, there is no such statutory 
requirement to provide such grounds in writing. The Court noted that 
it may not be practical to communicate grounds of arrest in writing 
in every situation, but if such a course is followed, the controversy 
about non-compliance will not arise at all.
27.	 It was further observed that to ensure the effective implementation 
of the constitutional mandate in Article 22, the law further requires 
such grounds to be effectively communicated not only to the detainee/
arrestee but also to their friends, relatives or any other nominated 
person as envisaged in Section 50A of CrPC 1973 (now Section 48 
of BNSS 2023). The legislative intent behind the incorporation of 
Section 50A of CrPC 1973 is to ensure that those in a position to 
act, i.e. secure legal representation, initiate the process for bail, are 
empowered to do so without any delay, thereby safeguarding the 
fundamental rights of the arrested person as enshrined in Article 21 
of the Constitution of India. The relevant portion of Vihaan Kumar 
(supra) is reproduced herein: 
“11. The view taken in Pankaj Bansal v. Union of India 
[(2024) 7 SCC 576 : (2024) 3 SCC (Cri) 450] was reiterated 
by this Court in Prabir Purkayastha v. State (NCT of Delhi) 
[(2024) 8 SCC 254 : (2024) 3 SCC (Cri) 573]. In paras 28 
and 29, this Court held thus: (Prabir Purkayastha case, 
SCC p. 278)
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
311
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
‘28. The language used in Article 22(1) and Article 
22(5) of the Constitution of India regarding the 
communication of the grounds is exactly the identical. 
Neither of the constitutional provisions require that the 
‘grounds’ of ‘arrest’ or ‘detention’, as the case may be, 
must be communicated in writing. Thus, interpretation 
to this important facet of the fundamental right as 
made by the Constitution Bench while examining the 
scope of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India would 
ipso facto apply to Article 22(1) of the Constitution 
of India insofar as the requirement to communicate 
the grounds of arrest is concerned.
29. Hence, we have no hesitation in reiterating 
that the requirement to communicate the grounds 
of arrest or the grounds of detention in writing to a 
person arrested in connection with an offence or a 
person placed under preventive detention as provided 
under Articles 22(1) and 22(5) of the Constitution of 
India is sacrosanct and cannot be breached under 
any situation. Non-compliance of this constitutional 
requirement and statutory mandate would lead to 
the custody or the detention being rendered illegal, 
as the case may be.’
(emphasis supplied)
***
***
***
16. An attempt was made by the learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the first respondent to argue that after his 
arrest, the appellant was repeatedly remanded to custody, 
and now a charge-sheet has been filed. His submission 
is that now, the custody of the appellant is pursuant 
to the order taking cognizance passed on the charge-
sheet. Accepting such arguments, with great respect to 
the learned Senior Counsel, will amount to completely 
nullifying Articles 21 and 22(1) of the Constitution. Once 
it is held that arrest is unconstitutional due to violation 
of Article 22(1), the arrest itself is vitiated. Therefore, 
continued custody of such a person based on orders of 
remand is also vitiated. Filing a charge-sheet and order 
312
Supreme Court Reports
of cognizance will not validate an arrest which is per se 
unconstitutional, being violative of Articles 21 and 22(1) of 
the Constitution of India. We cannot tinker with the most 
important safeguards provided under Article 22.
***
***
***
N. Kotiswar Singh, J. (supplementing)— I had the benefit 
of going through the draft opinion of my esteemed Brother 
Hon›ble Mr Justice Abhay S. Oka and I concur with the 
analysis and conclusions arrived at. However, I wish to 
add a few lines in supplement to the aforesaid opinion.
2. The issue on the requirement of communication of 
grounds of arrest to the person arrested, as mandated under 
Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India, which has also 
been incorporated in the Prevention of Money Laundering 
Act, 2002 under Section 19 thereof has been succinctly 
reiterated in this judgment. The constitutional mandate 
of informing the grounds of arrest to the person arrested 
in writing has been explained in Pankaj Bansal v. Union 
of India [(2024) 7 SCC 576 : (2024) 3 SCC (Cri) 450] so 
as to be meaningful to serve the intended purpose which 
has been reiterated in Prabir Purkayastha v. State (NCT 
of Delhi) [(2024) 8 SCC 254 : (2024) 3 SCC (Cri) 573]. 
The said constitutional mandate has been incorporated 
in the statute under Section 50CrPC (Section 47 of the 
BNSS). It may also be noted that the aforesaid provision 
of requirement for communicating the grounds of arrest, to 
be purposeful, is also required to be communicated to the 
friends, relatives or such other persons of the accused as 
may be disclosed or nominated by the arrested person for 
the purpose of giving such information as provided under 
Section 50-ACrPC. As may be noted, this is in the addition 
of the requirement as provided under Section 50(1)CrPC.
3. The purpose of inserting Section 50-ACrPC, making 
it obligatory on the person making arrest to inform about 
the arrest to the friends, relatives or persons nominated 
by the arrested person, is to ensure that they would be 
able to take immediate and prompt actions to secure the 
release of the arrested person as permissible under the 
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
313
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
law. The arrested person, because of his detention, may 
not have immediate and easy access to the legal process 
for securing his release, which would otherwise be available 
to the friends, relatives and such nominated persons by 
way of engaging lawyers, briefing them to secure release 
of the detained person on bail at the earliest. Therefore, 
the purpose of communicating the grounds of arrest to the 
detenue, and in addition to his relatives as mentioned above 
is not merely a formality but to enable the detained person 
to know the reasons for his arrest but also to provide the 
necessary opportunity to him through his relatives, friends 
or nominated persons to secure his release at the earliest 
possible opportunity for actualising the fundamental right 
to liberty and life as guaranteed under Article 21 of the 
Constitution. Hence, the requirement of communicating 
the grounds of arrest in writing is not only to the arrested 
person, but also to the friends, relatives or such other 
person as may be disclosed or nominated by the arrested 
person, so as to make the mandate of Article 22(1) of the 
Constitution meaningful and effective failing which, such 
arrest may be rendered illegal.”
28.	 Before we delve into analysing the provisions of law and jurisprudential 
developments by this Court, we find it quintessential to discuss the 
impact of arrest on an individual. The arrest of an individual invariably 
impacts not only the person arrested himself, but also the persons 
associated with him, i.e. family, friends, relatives, etc., affecting their 
psychological balance and overall social well-being. This Court has 
on several occasions underscored that there is a stigma attached to 
arrest which impairs the reputation and the standing of an individual 
in society. The stigma attached to arrest undermines a person’s social 
dignity and results into consequences that reverberate beyond the 
individual but also extend to their social circle.
29.	 The impacts of arrest are multidimensional and are not only limited 
to societal impact but also extend to the physical and mental health 
of the person. Mental health issues like depression due to custodial 
confinement can be aggravated by inadequate and overcrowded 
conditions prevalent in prisons. Such conditions severely impinge 
upon the fundamental rights of the arrested person and curtail his 
dignity and personal liberty.
314
Supreme Court Reports
30.	 This Court in Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar and Another4, 
observed that arrest results in embarrassment, restricts freedom, 
and leaves permanent scars. Lawmakers and the police are aware 
of this. The police and lawmakers are at odds, and it appears 
that the police have not learned the lesson that is implied in and 
reflected in the CrPC 1973 (now BNSS 2023). Despite long years 
of independence, it still maintains its colonial image and is primarily 
viewed as an instrument of oppression and harassment, and it is 
undoubtedly not regarded as a friend of the public.
31.	 In Joginder Kumar v. State of U.P. and Others5, this Court while 
framing guidelines regarding the rights of an arrested person has 
observed that the existence of a power to arrest and the justification 
to use such power are two different aspects. The person making 
arrest must be able to justify the arrest with reasons apart from his 
power to do so. Arrest of a person can cause irreversible damage 
to his reputation in the society as well as his self-esteem, therefore, 
arrest cannot be made in a routine manner. The Police Officer making 
an arrest must be cautious while arresting a person and ought to 
satisfy himself after a reasonable investigation to justify the person’s 
complicity and also the effect as well as the need of arrest. This 
Court has further observed that except in heinous offences, arrest 
must be avoided.
32.	 Having perused the jurisprudential developments and impact of arrest 
on a person, let us now consider the issues at hand.
33.	 The mandate contained in Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India 
is unambiguous and clear in nature, it provides that the arrested 
person must be informed of the grounds of arrest as soon as they 
can be. It further provides that the arrested person has the right to 
defend himself by consulting a legal practitioner of his choice. This 
constitutional mandate has been effectuated by the legislature in 
Section 50 of CrPC 1973 (now Section 47 of BNSS 2023) which 
provides that an arrested person shall be forthwith communicated 
with the grounds of his arrest.
34.	 The objective enshrined in Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India 
for furnishing grounds of arrest stems from the fundamental principle 
4	
(2014) 8 SCC 273 : AIR 2014 SC 2756
5	
(1994) 4 SCC 260
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
315
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
of providing opportunity to a person to allow him to defend himself 
from the accusations that are levelled against him leading to his 
arrest. The salutary purpose of informing the grounds of arrest is to 
enable the person to understand the basis of his arrest and engage 
legal counsel to challenge his arrest, remand or seek bail and/or 
avail of any other remedy as may be available to him/her under law.
35.	 It is pertinent to note that the arrested person must be given early 
access to legal assistance to enable him to defend himself and 
oppose the remand. The early access to legal counsel becomes 
a quintessential object to ensure that the personal liberty of the 
arrested person is protected. This Court in Suhas Chakma v. Union 
of India and Others6 while emphasizing on the need of pre-litigation 
assistance has directed that the “Guidelines on Early Access to Justice 
at Pre-arrest, Arrest and Remand Stage Framework” as framed by 
the National Legal Services Authority, are to be diligently pursued. 
The guidelines provide for legal assistance to the arrested person at 
the stage before remand. The remand advocate shall interact with 
the arrestee with the objective to inform him about the allegations 
against him and the grounds being put by the prosecution for 
seeking remand. The guidelines also provide for making available the 
translated copy of documents to the arrested person in the language 
he/she understands. The purpose of securing legal assistance before 
remand is not merely symbolic, but it is to ensure that the accused 
is afforded an effective opportunity to oppose the prayer for police 
custody and to place before the magistrate any circumstances that 
may warrant refusal or limitation of such custody. If the accused is 
not represented through a Counsel, he/she should be made aware 
that he/she is entitled for legal aid. As far as possible, it shall be 
ensured that every accused person is represented by an advocate, 
if he is not able to avail such assistance, he should be given free 
legal aid. A three-judge Bench of this Court in Ashok v. State of 
Uttar Pradesh7 held that an accused who is not represented by an 
advocate is entitled for free legal aid at all material stages starting 
from remand.
36.	 This statutory safeguard of legal assistance stands also reinforced by 
Section 38 of the BNSS 2023, which confers upon an arrested person 
6	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 3031
7	
(2025) 2 SCC 381 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3580
316
Supreme Court Reports
the right to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation, albeit 
not throughout its course. The object of this provision is to ensure 
meaningful access to legal assistance at the earliest stage, so that 
the advocate, once informed, may effectively exercise the rights 
available in law, including representation during remand proceedings 
and invocation of the right to seek bail.
37.	 Section 167 of CrPC 1973 (now Section 187 of BNSS 2023) while 
dealing with remand provides for a positive mandate on the police 
officer to forward the accused to the magistrate before expiry of such 
period as fixed under Section 57 CrPC 1973 (now Section 58 of 
BNSS 2023) when investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four 
hours. It further mandates that the magistrate to not authorize the 
detention of accused unless he is physically produced before him. The 
purpose of this provision mandating the production of accused before 
magistrate for exercise of the power of remanding him to custody 
under this section is with the dual purpose. First, ensuring physical 
presence of the accused and second to afford him an opportunity 
to be heard. The intent of this provision is not merely to be heard 
at the stage of remand but to be represented by the counsel of his 
choice. Thereafter, the duty is cast upon the magistrate to apply his 
judicial mind to the material produced before him, hear the accused 
or the counsel representing him to determine whether the accused 
should be remanded to police custody or should be detained at 
all within the parameters prescribed in Section 167 of CrPC 1973 
(Section 187 of BNSS 2023). The magistrate is not acting as a post 
office simply putting a stamp of approval to the remand papers as 
presented before him. In Manubhai Ratilal Patel v. State of Gujarat 
and Others8 this Court held that it is obligatory on the part of the 
magistrate to satisfy himself whether the materials placed before 
him justify such a remand.
38.	 These above discussed principles embody the manifestation of the 
constitutional safeguard sought to be achieved in Article 22 of the 
Constitution of India which is that the arrested person must be well 
equipped with the information not only about his arrest but the reasons 
and grounds thereof prior to his production before the magistrate 
so as to enable him to effectively defend himself and oppose the 
police and judicial custody and even press for bail. The obligation to 
8	
(2013) 1 SCC 314
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
317
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
inform the grounds of arrest to the arrestee is thus, not just a mere 
procedural formality, instead it flows from the fundamental right of 
personal liberty which sets the further course for protection from 
the oppressive restrictions imposed upon the free movement in the 
society of an arrestee during remand.
39.	 A plain reading of Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India shows that 
the intent of the constitution makers while incorporating the provisions 
was not to create any exceptional circumstances, instead it reads as 
“No person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being 
informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest….”, it 
casts a mandatory unexceptional duty on the State to provide the 
arrested person with the grounds of such arrest with the objective 
to enable that person to be able to defend himself by consulting 
a legal practitioner of his choice. This mandate of Article 22 (1) is 
notwithstanding any exception. This Court has made it explicit that 
the constitutional obligation under Article 22 is not statute-specific and 
it is grounded in fundamental right of life and personal liberty under 
Article 21 of the Constitution of India, therefore making it applicable 
to all offences including those under the IPC 1860 (now BNS 2023).
40.	 The requirement of informing the arrested person the grounds of 
arrest, in the light of and under Article 22(1) of the Constitution of 
India, is not a mere formality but a mandatory binding constitutional 
safeguard which has been included in part III of the Constitution under 
the head of Fundamental Rights. Thus, if a person is not informed 
of the grounds of his arrest as soon as maybe, it would amount to 
the violation of his fundamental rights thereby curtailing his right to 
life and personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, 
rendering the arrest illegal.
41.	 Another aspect, which flows from the above discussion and merits 
consideration is the mode of informing grounds of arrest to the arrested 
person to effectively serve the intended purpose of Article 22(1) of the 
Constitution of India. This Court, as observed above, had held that it 
would not be ideal to read out the grounds of arrest to a person who 
is arrested, as he may not be in the frame of mind to remember the 
contents of grounds that are read out to him. The Court underscored 
that if the authorities are permitted to read out the grounds and claim 
compliance with the constitutional and statutory mandate, the very 
purpose of the constitutional protection would be nugatory.
318
Supreme Court Reports
42.	 As mentioned above, it has been held while dealing with the mode 
of communicating the grounds of arrest so as to serve the intended 
purpose of the constitutional mandate that the language used in 
Article 22(1) and 22(5) regarding communication of the grounds is 
identical and therefore the interpretation of Article 22(5) shall ipso 
facto apply to Article 22(1). The grounds of arrest must be furnished 
in writing, in order to attend the true intended purpose of Article 22(1). 
Reference at this stage may be made to the Constitution Bench 
Judgment of this Court in Harikisan (supra) wherein while dealing 
with the Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India in the context of 
the right of a detainee to be made aware of the grounds of arrest, 
it has been held that the same should be furnished in a language 
which he can understand and in a script which he can read, if he is 
a literate person. The relevant portion thereof reads thus:
“7. It has not been found by the High Court that the appellant 
knew enough English to understand the grounds of his 
detention. The High Court has only stated that ‘he has 
studied up to 7th Hindi standard, which is equivalent to 3rd 
English standard’. The High Court negatived the contention 
raised on behalf of the appellant not on the ground that 
the appellant knew enough English, to understand the 
case against him, but on the ground, as already indicated, 
that the service upon him of the Order and grounds of 
detention in English was enough communication to him 
to enable him to make his representation. We must, 
therefore, proceed on the assumption that the appellant 
did not know enough English to understand the grounds, 
contained in many paragraphs, as indicated above, in order 
to be able effectively to make his representation against 
the Order of Detention. The learned Attorney-General 
has tried to answer this contention in several ways. He 
has first contended that when the Constitution speaks of 
communicating the grounds of detention to the detenue, 
it means communication in the official language, which 
continues to be English; secondly, the communication 
need not be in writing and the translation and explanation 
in Hindi offered by the Inspector of Police, while serving 
the Order of Detention and the grounds would be enough 
compliance with the requirements of the law and the 
Constitution; and thirdly, that it was not necessary in the 
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
319
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
circumstances of the case to supply the grounds in Hindi. 
In our opinion, this was not sufficient compliance in this 
case with the requirements of the Constitution, as laid 
down in clause (5) of Article 22. To a person, who is not 
conversant with the English language, service of the Order 
and the grounds of detention in English, with their oral 
translation or explanation by the police officer serving them 
does not fulfil the requirements of the law. As has been 
explained by this Court in the case of State of Bombay v. 
Atma Ram Sridhar Vaidya [1951 SCC 43 : (1951) SCR 
167] clause (5) of Article 22 requires that the grounds of 
his detention should be made available to the detenue 
as soon as may be, and that the earliest opportunity of 
making a representation against the Order should also be 
afforded to him. In order that the detenue should have that 
opportunity, it is not sufficient that he has been physically 
delivered the means of knowledge with which to make 
his representation. In order that the detenue should be in 
a position effectively to make his representation against 
the Order, he should have knowledge of the grounds of 
detention, which are in the nature of the charge against 
him setting out the kinds of prejudicial acts which the 
authorities attribute to him. Communication, in this context, 
must, therefore, mean imparting to the detenue sufficient 
knowledge of all the grounds on which the Order of 
Detention is based. In this case the grounds are several, 
and are based on numerous speeches said to have been 
made by the appellant himself on different occasions and 
different dates. Naturally, therefore, any oral translation 
or explanation given by the police officer serving those 
on the detenue would not amount to communicating the 
grounds. Communication, in this context, must mean 
bringing home to the detenue effective knowledge of the 
facts and circumstances on which the Order of Detention 
is based.
8. We do not agree with the High Court in its conclusion 
that in every case communication of the grounds of 
detention in English, so long as it continues to be the 
official language of the State, is enough compliance 
with the requirements of the Constitution. If the detained 
320
Supreme Court Reports
person is conversant with the English language, he will 
naturally be in a position to understand the gravamen of 
the charge against him and the facts and circumstances 
on which the order of detention is based. But to a person 
who is not so conversant with the English language, in 
order to satisfy the requirements of the Constitution, the 
detenue must be given the grounds in a language which 
he can understand, and in a script which he can read, if 
he is a literate person.”
43.	 Further, the above judgment has been reiterated and followed 
by this Court in Lallubhai Jogibhai Patel v. Union of India and 
Others9 where it has been reaffirmed that grounds of detention must 
be communicated to the detenu in writing in a language which he 
understands.
44.	 On perusal of the above two judgments, it turns out that mere 
communication of the grounds in a language not understood by 
the person arrested does not fulfil the constitutional mandate under 
Article 22 of the Constitution of India. The failure to supply such 
grounds in a language understood by the arrestee renders the 
constitutional safeguards illusory and infringes the personal liberty of 
the person as guaranteed under Article 21 and 22 of the Constitution 
of India. The objective of the constitutional mandate is to place the 
person in a position to comprehend the basis of the allegations 
levelled against him and it can only be realised when the grounds are 
furnished in a language understood by the person, thereby enabling 
him to exercise his rights effectively.
45.	 From the catena of decisions discussed above, the legal position which 
emerges is that the constitutional mandate provided in Article 22(1) 
of the Constitution of India is not a mere procedural formality but a 
constitutional safeguard in the form of fundamental rights. The intent 
and purpose of the constitutional mandate is to prepare the arrested 
person to defend himself. If the provisions of Article 22(1) are read 
in a restrictive manner, its intended purpose of securing personal 
liberty would not be achieved rather curtailed and put to disuse. 
The mode of communicating the grounds of arrest must be such 
that it effectively serves the intended purpose as envisioned under 
9	
(1981) 2 SCC 427
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
321
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
the Constitution of India which is to enable the arrested person to 
get legal counsel, oppose the remand and effectively defend himself 
by exercising his rights and safeguards as provided in law. The 
grounds of arrest must be provided to the arrestee in such a manner 
that sufficient knowledge of facts constituting grounds is imparted 
and communicated to the arrested person effectively in a language 
which he/she understands. The mode of communication ought to be 
such that it must achieve the intended purpose of the constitutional 
safeguard. The objective of the constitutional mandate would not 
be fulfilled by mere reading out the grounds to the arrested person, 
such an approach would be antithesis to the purpose of Article 22(1). 
There is no harm in providing the grounds of arrest in writing in the 
language the arrestee understands, this approach would not only 
fulfil the true intent of the constitutional mandate but will also be 
beneficial for the investigating agency to prove that the grounds of 
arrest were informed to the arrestee when a challenge is made to 
the arrest on the plea of non-furnishing of the grounds of arrest.
46.	 This Court is of the opinion that to achieve the intended objective 
of the constitutional mandate of Article 22(1) of the Constitution of 
India, the grounds of arrest must be informed to the arrested person 
in each and every case without exception and the mode of the 
communication of such grounds must be in writing in the language 
he understands.
47.	 It would not be out of context now to refer to an obligation which has 
been imposed on a person making arrest, as provided under Section 
50A read in relation to Section 50 of the CrPC 1973 (now Section 
48 and 47 of BNSS 2023 respectively), to inform the arrestee of 
his right to indicate his relative, friend or such other person for the 
purpose of giving information with regard to his arrest. Simultaneously, 
a duty has also been cast on the person making arrest to forthwith 
thereafter inform of such arrest with reasons and the place where 
the arrested person is being held to the such indicated person. 
The police officer/person making any arrest shall make an entry of 
the fact as to who has been informed of such an arrest in a book 
to be kept in the police station. Further protection in this regard is 
reflected when a duty has been cast on the magistrate to satisfy 
himself, when the arrestee is produced before him, that the above 
requirement stands complied with. This requirement is in addition to 
the rights of an arrestee to be made aware of the grounds of arrest.
322
Supreme Court Reports
48.	 The second issue which requires consideration is when grounds of 
arrest are not furnished either prior to arrest or immediately after the 
arrest, would it vitiate the arrest for non-compliance of the provisions of 
Section 50 of CrPC 1973 (now Section 47 of BNSS 2023) irrespective 
of certain exigencies where furnishing such grounds would not be 
possible forthwith.
49.	 It is by now settled that if the grounds of arrest are not furnished 
to the arrestee in writing, this non-compliance will result in breach 
of the constitutional and statutory safeguards hence rendering the 
arrest and remand illegal and the person will be entitled to be set at 
liberty. The statute is silent with regard to the mode, nature or the time 
and stage at which the grounds of arrest has to be communicated. 
Article 22 says ‘as soon as may be’ which would obviously not mean 
prior to arrest but can be on arrest or thereafter. The indication is 
as early as it can be conveyed. There may be situations wherein it 
may not be practically possible to supply such grounds of arrest to 
the arrested person at the time of his arrest or immediately. 
50.	 It may so happen that in the presence of a police officer a cognizable 
offence is being committed and the factual matrix presents a tangible 
and imminent risk of the suspect absconding or committing further 
offence(s). For instance, in a case involving a murder being committed 
in front of a police officer, it may not be possible for the officer to 
provide the grounds of arrest in writing before the arrest or forthwith 
on the arrest to the accused. A rigid insistence upon informing of 
written ground(s) of arrest before or at the time of effecting the arrest 
or immediately thereafter may result into police officer not being able 
to discharge their duty and responsibility efficiently and effectively. 
The constitutional safeguards, valuable as they are, cannot be 
interpreted in a manner so as to allow it to metamorphose into a 
procedural impediment that handicaps the law enforcing agencies in 
due lawful discharge of their duties. Therefore, a balance between 
compliance of the constitutional as also the statutorily mandated 
safeguards on the one hand vis-a-vis the effective discharge of 
lawful statutory law enforcement duties and responsibilities cast 
upon the State agencies must be struck.
51.	 Supplanting the above situation, there may be a case wherein the 
Investigating Officer has sent a notice for appearance of the accused 
to join the investigation under Section 41A of CrPC 1973 (now Section 
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
323
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
35(3) to 35(6) of BNSS 2023) pursuant to which the accused has 
joined the investigation. The Investigating Officer, after perusal of 
material available before him and/or on interrogating the accused, 
makes up his mind that the arrest of the accused person is required 
for further investigation or has other reason(s) for arrest, in such 
cases, since the accused is under the supervision of the Investigating 
Agency and there exists no apprehension of him absconding, it 
becomes incumbent upon the Police Officer to supply the grounds 
of arrest in writing on arresting the accused person. This can also be 
followed, for instance, in cases involving offences which are primarily 
based on documentary evidence/records, economic offences such 
as under PMLA where the grounds of arrest in writing be furnished 
to the arrested person on arrest simultaneously.
52.	 We thus hold, that, in cases where the police are already in 
possession of documentary material furnishing a cogent basis for 
the arrest, the written grounds of arrest must be furnished to the 
arrestee on his arrest. However, in exceptional circumstances such 
as offences against body or property committed in flagrante delicto, 
where informing the grounds of arrest in writing on arrest is rendered 
impractical, it shall be sufficient for the police officer or other person 
making the arrest to orally convey the same to the person at the 
time of arrest. Later, a written copy of grounds of arrest must be 
supplied to the arrested person within a reasonable time and in no 
event later than two hours prior to production of the arrestee before 
the magistrate for remand proceedings. The remand papers shall 
contain the grounds of arrest and in case there is delay in supply 
thereof, a note indicating a cause for it be included for the information 
of the magistrate.
53.	 The above indicated lower limit of two hours minimum interval 
before the production is grounded in the functional necessity so 
that the right as provided to an arrestee under the Constitution and 
the statute is safeguarded effectively. This period would ensure 
that the counsel has adequate time to scrutinize the basis of arrest 
and gather relevant material to defend the arrestee proficiently and 
capably while opposing the remand. Any shorter interval may render 
such preparation illusory, thereby resulting in non-compliance of the 
constitutional and statutory mandate. The two-hour threshold before 
production for remand thus strikes a judicious balance between 
324
Supreme Court Reports
safeguarding the arrestee’s constitutional rights under Article 22(1) 
and preserving the operational continuity of criminal investigations.
54.	 In view of the above, we hold with regard to the second issue that 
non supply of grounds of arrest in writing to the arrestee prior to or 
immediately after arrest would not vitiate such arrest on the grounds 
of non-compliance with the provisions of Section 50 of the CrPC 
1973 (now Section 47 of BNSS 2023) provided the said grounds 
are supplied in writing within a reasonable time and in any case two 
hours prior to the production of the arrestee before the magistrate 
for remand proceedings.
55.	 It goes without saying that if the abovesaid schedule for supplying 
the grounds of arrest in writing is not adhered to, the arrest will be 
rendered illegal entitling the release of the arrestee. On such release, 
an application for remand or custody, if required, will be moved along 
with the reasons and necessity for the same, after the supply of the 
grounds of arrest in writing setting forth the explanation for non-supply 
thereof within the above stipulated schedule. On receipt of such an 
application, the magistrate shall decide the same expeditiously and 
preferably within a week of submission thereof by adhering to the 
principles of natural justice.
56.	 In conclusion, it is held that:
i)	
The constitutional mandate of informing the arrestee the grounds 
of arrest is mandatory in all offences under all statutes including 
offences under IPC 1860 (now BNS 2023);
ii)	
The grounds of arrest must be communicated in writing to the 
arrestee in the language he/she understands;
iii)	
In case(s) where, the arresting officer/person is unable to 
communicate the grounds of arrest in writing on or soon after 
arrest, it be so done orally. The said grounds be communicated 
in writing within a reasonable time and in any case at least two 
hours prior to production of the arrestee for remand proceedings 
before the magistrate.
iv)	
In case of non-compliance of the above, the arrest and 
subsequent remand would be rendered illegal and the person 
will be at liberty to be set free.
[2025] 11 S.C.R. 
325
Mihir Rajesh Shah v. State of Maharashtra and Another
57.	 After having come to the above conclusion, it is pertinent to note that 
the provision of law under Section 50 of CrPC 1973 (Section 47 of 
BNSS 2023) does not provide for a specific mode of or time frame 
for communication of the grounds of arrest to the person arrested. 
This Court in Prabir Purkayastha (supra), held that the grounds of 
arrest be conveyed to the arrestee in writing in all offences at the 
earliest, which means it need not be given at the time of arrest but 
within a reasonable time thereafter, for offences under all the statutes, 
which period would be as has been laid down above in this order.
58.	 We are cognizant that there existed no consistent or binding 
requirement mandating written communication of the grounds of arrest 
for all the offences. Holding as above, in our view, would ensure 
implementation of the constitutional rights provided to an arrestee as 
engrafted under Article 22 of the Constitution of India in an effective 
manner. Such clarity on obligation would avoid uncertainty in the 
administration of criminal justice. The ends of fairness and legal 
discipline therefore demand that this procedure as affirmed above 
shall govern arrests henceforth.
59.	 In Criminal Appeal No. 2195 of 2025, while issuing notice, this Court 
had clarified that the Court is not inclined to entertain the petition 
on its merits, and notice was issued only to settle the issues to 
bring about clarity thereon, with that having been reached the same 
stands disposed of. 
60.	 As far as the Criminal Appeal No. 2189 of 2025 and Criminal Appeal 
No. 2190 of 2025 are concerned, this Court while granting leave on 
22.04.2025 had by way of ad interim relief directed the Appellants 
to be released on bail during pendency of these Appeals, the same 
shall continue. However, the prosecution may move an application 
for remand or custody, if required, along with the reasons and 
necessity for the same, after the supply of the grounds of arrest in 
writing to the accused, before the magistrate if the case has not been 
committed for trial and in case the trial having commenced before 
the Trial Court as the case may be. 
61.	 The Appeals are disposed of in the above terms.
62.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
63.	 Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 8704 of 2025 was tagged with 
these Appeals and the Petitioner was granted an ad interim relief 
326
Supreme Court Reports
directing his release on bail vide Order dated 02.06.2025. Since 
there being no update with regard to effecting of service upon the 
Respondent nor any reply has been filed, the ad interim relief shall 
continue, and the petition be listed before an appropriate bench after 
obtaining the orders on the administrative side from the Hon’ble the 
Chief Justice of India.
64.	 We acknowledge and appreciate the constructive assistance rendered 
by the learned Amicus Curiae and the learned Counsels for the 
parties to this Court. 
65.	 We direct the Registry to send one copy of this judgment to all the 
Registrar Generals of the High Courts and the Chief Secretaries of 
all the States and Union Territories.
Result of the case: Appeals disposed of; SLP (Criminal) No. 8704 
of 2025 be listed before an appropriate bench 
after obtaining the orders on the administrative 
side from the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey