[2025] 3 S.C.R. 502 : 2025 INSC 338
Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther & Anr. 
v. 
State of Maharashtra
(Criminal Appeal No. 2356 of 2024)
07 March 2025
[Abhay S. Oka and Ujjal Bhuyan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as to whether the High Court was correct in dismissing 
the revision application filed by the appellants assailing the order of 
the trial court dismissing their discharge applications u/s.227 CrPC.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.227 – Discharge – Penal 
Code, 1860 – ss.34, 304 Part II, 304A – Culpable homicide 
not amounting to murder – Appellant no.1 was doing interior 
decoration of the shop on contract basis and the appellant no.2 
was the Store Manager of the company which had taken the 
said shop on lease – Two employees of appellant no.1 while 
working on the sign board of the shop at a height of 12 feet 
from the ground level, struck by electricity, got electrocuted, 
and fell from iron ladder resulting in multiple injuries, leading 
to their death – Registration of FIR – Chargesheet against 
the appellants for committing an offence u/ss.304A/182/201 
rw s.34 IPC since the appellants did not provide any safety 
equipments to the deceased employees – Appellants sought 
their discharge u/s. 227 which was dismissed – Revision 
applications thereagainst dismissed by the High Court – 
Correctness: 
Held: Basic ingredient of s.304 Part II is presence of knowledge 
and absence of intention – Doer must have the knowledge that 
the act performed by him would likely cause death etc. but there 
should not be any intention to cause death – No prima facie case 
can be said to have been made out against the appellants for 
committing an offence u/s.304 Part II – No intention on the part 
of the two appellants to cause the death or cause such bodily 
* Author
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
503
Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra
injury as was likely to cause the death of the two deceased 
employees – Also, the appellants had no knowledge that by asking 
the two deceased employees to work on the sign board that such 
act was likely to cause death – Thus, the basic ingredients for 
commission of offence u/s.304 Part II are absent – Furthermore, at 
the stage of consideration of discharge, the court is not required 
to undertake a threadbare analysis of the materials gathered by 
the prosecution – It is only to be seen that there are sufficient 
grounds to proceed against the accused – On facts, the incident 
was purely accidental, and no prima facie case can be said to 
be made out against the appellants for committing an offence 
u/ss.304A and 304 Part  II  – In any case, the trial court only 
considered culpability of the appellants qua s.304 Part II as the 
Magistrate had committed the case to the Court of Sessions 
confining the allegations against the appellant to s. 304 Part II 
and not s.304A – Both the trial court and High Court erred in 
rejecting the discharge applications of the appellants – Order 
of the trial court and impugned order set aside and quashed, 
and the discharge applications are allowed. [Paras 12.3, 12.4, 
14-16, 17.3, 18]
Case Law Cited
Keshub Mahindra v. State of M.P. [1996] Supp. 6 SCR 285 : 
(1996) 6 SCC 129 – distinguished. 
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal 
Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Discharge; Culpable homicide not amounting to murder; Knowledge; 
Intention; Fall from iron ladder; Electrocution; Safety equipments; 
Murder; Prima facie case of culpable homicide; Unnatural death.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
2356 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 02.11.2017 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in CRRA No. 269 of 2017
504
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Gaurav Agarwal, Sr. Adv., S S Ray, Ms. Praveena Gautam, Pawan 
Shukla, Ms. Kanika Kalyan, Ms. Akanksha Tyagi, Ms. Rakhi Ray.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Shrirang B. Varma, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Aaditya Aniruddha 
Pande, Bharat Bagla, Sourav Singh, Aditya Krishna, Ms. Preet S. 
Phanse, Adarsh Dubey.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Ujjal Bhuyan, J.
This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and 
order dated 02.11.2017 passed by the High Court of Judicature at 
Bombay (briefly ‘the High Court’ hereinafter) in Criminal Revision 
Application No. 269 of 2017. 
2.	
By the aforesaid judgment and order dated 02.11.2017, the revision 
application filed by the appellants assailing the order dated 01.04.2017 
passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Pune in Sessions 
Case No. 749 of 2014 came to be dismissed.
2.1.	 Be it stated that by the aforesaid order dated 01.04.2017, learned 
Additional Sessions Judge, Pune dismissed the discharge 
applications filed by the appellants being Exhibit Nos. 6 and 
10 in Sessions Case No.749 of 2014.
3.	
Appellants are Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther and Nimesh Pravinchandra 
Shah.
4.	
Appellant No. 1 was doing interior decoration of the concerned shop 
in Pune on contract basis. Appellant No. 2 was the Store Operation 
Manager of M/s. lntergold Gems Private Limited which had taken 
the concerned shop on lease.
4.1.	 On 27.09.2013, at about 09:00 PM, the work of decoration of the 
front side of the shop was being undertaken by two employees 
of appellant No.1, Salauddin Shaikh and Arun Sharma. It is 
alleged that both the employees viz. Salauddin Shaikh and 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
505
Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra
Arun Sharma were provided with an iron ladder and they were 
working on the sign board which was approximately at a height 
of 12 feet from the ground level. While they were working on 
the sign board, they were struck by electricity as a result of 
which they got electrocuted and fell down. Due to the fall, they 
suffered head injuries as well as injuries on their arms. They 
were taken to Pune Hospital and Research Centre where they 
were declared dead on arrival. 
4.2.	 Accidental reports bearing Nos. 67/23 and 68/23 under 
Section 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) 
were registered. 
4.3.	 After more than two months, on 04.12.2013, FIR was lodged at 
Vishrambag Police Station, Pune by the Police Sub-Inspector 
Shri S.G. Patil against the appellants which was registered as 
FIR No. 316/2013. It was stated that the appellants did not 
provide any safety equipments like belt, helmet, rubber shoes etc 
to the two deceased employees. According to the investigating 
officer, the two accused persons had not taken proper care and 
caution by providing safety shoes, safety belt etc to the two 
employees though the work assigned to them was quite risky. 
Informant opined that both the appellants were responsible 
for the unnatural death of the two employees since they had 
knowledge that there was risk to the lives of the employees. 
Therefore, the first informant summed up by saying that both 
the accused persons were responsible for the unnatural death 
of the two deceased persons. Accordingly, it was alleged that 
appellants had committed offences under Sections 304 and 
304A IPC.
4.4.	 On 04.12.2013 itself both the appellants were arrested in 
connection with the aforesaid FIR. They were subsequently 
released on the same day. After completion of investigation, 
police submitted chargesheet in which the two appellants 
were arrayed as accused. Appellants were chargesheeted for 
committing an offence under Sections 304A/182/201 read with 
Section 34 IPC. 
4.5.	 Learned Judicial Magistrate First Class, Pune, before whom 
the chargesheet was filed, was of the view that there were 
material to attract Section 304 Part II IPC. Since it became a 
506
sessions triable case, the same was committed to the Court 
of Additional Sessions Judge, Pune where it was registered as 
Sessions Case No.749 of 2014.
5.	
Appellants filed Exhibit Nos. 6 and 10 applications in the Court of 
Additional Sessions Judge, Pune seeking their discharge under 
Section 227 of CrPC. 
5.1.	 Contention of the appellants in the discharge applications 
was that there were no materials to show that the appellants 
had committed the alleged offence. Ingredients of the alleged 
offence charged were not even prima facie established against 
the appellants. Charge levelled by the prosecution against the 
appellants was groundless. FIR was totally silent about any 
overt act of the appellants. Appellants were not present at the 
place of occurrence when the incident took place. There was 
no negligence on the part of the appellants; not to speak of 
having any knowledge or intention to cause the death of the 
two employees or such bodily injury as would likely cause their 
death.
5.2.	 Even if all the statements of the witnesses were considered and 
accepted as correct, the trial would not end in conviction of the 
appellants. Going ahead with the trial would be a futile exercise. 
There were no materials to show that appellants had committed 
the offence as charged. In the circumstances, appellants sought 
for discharge as contemplated under Section 227 of the CrPC. 
6.	
Learned Additional Sessions Judge, Pune vide his order dated 
01.04.2017 dismissed both the discharge applications. He held that 
the two appellants were certainly not oblivious of the fact that they 
had not provided safety gear to the employees which was certainly 
dangerous to them as they got exposed to electrocution risk. Learned 
Additional Sessions Judge was also of the view that there was much 
force in the argument advanced on behalf of the prosecution that 
there was sufficient material justifying framing of charge against 
the accused for the offence punishable under Section 304 Part II 
read with Section 34 IPC. In that view of the matter, the discharge 
applications were dismissed. 
7.	
Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, appellants preferred Criminal 
Revision Application No. 269 of 2017 before the High Court. After 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
507
Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra
going through the materials on record and after hearing the parties, 
High Court was of the view that there was strong suspicion against 
both the appellants for committing the offence for which they were 
charged. It could not be said that there were no grounds to proceed 
against the appellants. No case for interference was made out. 
Hence, the revision petition was dismissed vide the judgment and 
order dated 02.11.2017. 
8.	
Assailing the aforesaid judgment and order dated 02.11.2017 of the 
High Court, appellants preferred the related SLP(Crl.) No. 9928 of 
2017. By order dated 09.01.2018, this Court had issued notice and 
granted stay of further proceedings in Sessions Case No. 749 of 
2014 pending on the file of the Additional Sessions Judge, Pune. 
8.1.	 The matter was heard on 30.04.2024 when leave was granted. 
Hence, the appeal.
9.	
Learned counsel for the appellants submits that both the Trial 
Court and the High Court fell in error in rejecting the discharge 
applications filed by the appellants. Though the prosecution had 
submitted chargesheet alleging commission of offence under Sections 
304A/182/201 IPC read with Section 34 IPC, learned Magistrate 
while committing the case to the Court of Sessions concluded that 
there was material to invoke Section 304 Part II IPC. Trial Court took 
the view that there is sufficient material justifying framing of charge 
against the appellants for the offence punishable under Section 304 
Part II read with Section 34 IPC. Interestingly, High Court proceeded 
on the basis that appellants were accused of committing offences 
under Sections 304 and 304A IPC while dismissing the revision 
application of the appellants. 
9.1.	 Learned counsel submits that no offence is made out against the 
appellants under Section 304 Part II IPC or even under Section 
304A IPC. The two deceased employees of appellant No. 1 
were working on the sign board as part of cleaning the front 
side of the shop. It was an accident that they got electrocuted 
and fell down because of which they suffered multiple injuries 
leading to their death.
9.2.	 The only reason for filing of chargesheet against the appellants 
is that according to the prosecution, appellants had not provided 
safety equipments to the two deceased employees such as 
508
rubber shoes, safety belt etc. He submits that non-furnishing 
of such equipments would not make it a criminal offence.
9.3.	 Adverting to the order of the High Court, learned counsel 
submits that the High Court proceeded on the basis that it 
was expected from a prudent person to have provided the 
deceased employees wooden scaffolding instead of an iron 
ladder. Therefore, by applying the test of a prudent person, High 
Court found shortcomings on the conduct of the appellants. 
Therefore, it observed that a strong suspicion could be inferred 
against the appellants that they had knowledge that by asking 
the two deceased employees to work in the manner in which 
they did would cause their death. 
9.4.	 Learned counsel submits that such observations by the High 
Court are way off the mark and cannot justify initiation of criminal 
proceedings against the appellants. Neither any negligent or 
rash act was committed by the appellants nor any specific 
overt act can be attributed to the appellants. It was a case of 
sudden accident. 
9.5.	 Learned counsel also submits that appellants have paid 
compensation to the legal heirs of the two deceased employees 
to the extent of Rs. 5,91,180.00 (Arun Sharma) and Rs. 
5,20,584.00 (Salauddin Shaikh). Appellant No. 1 has also 
provided employment to the brother of the deceased Salauddin 
Shaikh. That apart, educational expenses of the children of Arun 
Sharma have been taken care of by appellant No. 1.
9.6.	 In that view of the matter, learned counsel for the appellants 
submits that there is no material to justify launch of criminal 
trial against the appellants. Therefore, the appellants should 
be discharged. 
10.	 Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent submits that appellants 
knew fully well about the risk that the two deceased employees had 
to undertake to do the work assigned to them. Yet the appellants 
did not provide any safety equipments to them. The two deceased 
employees sustained electric shock and fell down because of which 
they suffered multiple injuries causing their death. There is, thus, a 
strong prima facie case made out against the appellants. 
10.1.	 Learned counsel submits that there is sufficient material to 
justify framing of charge against the appellants for the offence 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
509
Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra
punishable under Section 302 Part II IPC read with Section 
34 thereof. In any case, police had filed the charge-sheet 
alleging commission of offence under Section 304A IPC by 
the appellants. There are sufficient materials to substantiate 
such a charge. In this connection, learned counsel has placed 
reliance on the decision of this Court in Keshub Mahindra Vs. 
State of M.P.1 
10.2.	 Finally, learned counsel for the respondent submits that there 
is no merit in the appeal and, therefore, the same should be 
dismissed. 	
11.	 Submissions made by learned counsel for the parties have received 
the due consideration of the court. 
11.1.	 At the outset, it would apposite to deal with the relevant legal 
provisions.
12.	 We have noted above that the appellants have been charged for 
committing offence under Section 304 Part II IPC read with Section 34 
IPC. Since Section 34 IPC covers common intention, the substantive 
charge against the appellants is under Section 304 Part II IPC which 
reads as under:
Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder – 
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to ten years or with fine or with both, if the act is done 
with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death; but without any 
intention to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as is likely 
to cause death. 
12.1.	 The ingredients constituting an offence under Section 304 
Part II IPC are as follows:
(i) he must commit culpable homicide not amounting 
to murder;
(ii) the act must be done with the knowledge that it 
is likely to cause death;
1	
(1996) 6 SCC 129
510
(iii) but such act is done without any intention to cause 
death or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to 
cause death.
12.2.	 Therefore, the first important expression is ‘culpable homicide 
not amounting to murder’. Culpable homicide is defined in 
Section 299 IPC. It says that whoever causes death by doing 
an act with the intention of causing death or with the intention 
of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death or with 
the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, 
commits the offence of culpable homicide. 
12.3.	 All culpable homicides are murders except in the cases 
excepted under Section 300 IPC. Thus, except the cases 
specifically exempted under Section 300 IPC, all other acts 
within the meaning of Section 299 IPC would amount to 
committing the offence of culpable homicide. However, what is 
important to note is that for committing the offence of culpable 
homicide, a positive act must be done by the doer with the 
intention that such act would cause death or cause such bodily 
injury as is likely to cause death or he having the knowledge 
that by such an act, death may be caused. What, therefore, is 
significant is that the doer of the act must have the intention 
of causing death or the intention of causing such bodily injury 
as is likely to cause death or has the knowledge that by doing 
such an act he is likely to cause death. Therefore, to commit 
the offence of culpable homicide, intention or knowledge is 
of crucial importance. 
12.4.	 Coming back to Section 304 Part II IPC, we find that the 
said section would be attracted if anyone commits culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder if the act is done with the 
knowledge that it is likely to cause death but without any 
intention to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as is 
likely to cause death. Therefore, the requirement of Section 304 
Part II IPC is that the doer must have the knowledge that the 
act performed is likely to cause death or to cause such bodily 
injury as is likely to cause death but without any intention to 
cause death. Thus, the basic ingredient of Section 304 Part 
II IPC is presence of knowledge and absence of intention. 
The doer must have the knowledge that the act performed 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
511
Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra
by him would likely cause death etc but there should not be 
any intention to cause death. 
13.	 This being the legal framework, let us now deal with the charge 
against the appellants taking the same as correct. According to the 
prosecution and accepted by the Trial Court and the High Court, 
the two accused persons had not taken proper care and caution by 
providing safety shoes, safety belt etc to the two employees though 
they were asked to perform the job of working on the sign board as 
part of decorating the front side of the shop which was approximately 
at a height of 12 feet from the ground level. The accused persons 
had provided only an iron ladder to the two employees but while 
working they were struck by electricity as a result of which they 
suffered electrocution and fell down. They suffered multiple injuries 
which led to their death. Therefore, both the accused persons 
were declared to be responsible for the unnatural death of the two 
deceased employees. 
14.	 Even if we take the allegation against the appellants as correct, we 
are afraid no prima facie case can be said to have been made out 
against the appellants for committing an offence under Section 304 
Part II IPC. From the record of the case, it is evident that there was 
no intention on the part of the two appellants to cause the death 
or cause such bodily injury as was likely to cause the death of the 
two deceased employees. It cannot also be said that the appellants 
had knowledge that by asking the two deceased employees to work 
on the sign board as part of the work of decoration of the frontage 
of the shop, they had the knowledge that such an act was likely to 
cause the death of the two deceased employees. As such, no prima 
facie case of culpable homicide can be said to have been made out 
against the appellants. If that be so, the subsequent requirement 
of having knowledge that the act was likely to cause the death but 
not having any intention to cause death would become irrelevant 
though we may hasten to add that nothing is discernible from the 
record of the case that the appellants had the knowledge that by 
asking the two employees to work on the sign board would likely 
cause their death or cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause 
their death. 
15.	 Therefore, the basic ingredients for commission of offence under 
Section 304 Part II IPC are absent in the present case. 
512
16.	 Section 227 CrPC deals with discharge. What Section 227 CrPC 
contemplates is that if upon consideration of the record of the 
case and the documents submitted therewith and after hearing the 
submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the 
judge considers that there is no sufficient grounds for proceeding 
against the accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his 
reasons for doing so. At the stage of consideration of discharge, 
the court is not required to undertake a threadbare analysis of the 
materials gathered by the prosecution. All that is required to be seen 
at this stage is that there are sufficient grounds to proceed against 
the accused. In other words, the materials should be sufficient to 
enable the court to initiate a criminal trial against the accused. It may 
be so that at the end of the trial, the accused may still be acquitted. 
At the stage of discharge, court is only required to consider as to 
whether there are sufficient materials which can justify launch of a 
criminal trial against the accused. By its very nature, a discharge is 
at a higher pedestal than an acquittal. Acquittal is at the end of the 
trial process, may be for a technicality or on benefit of doubt or the 
prosecution could not prove the charge against the accused; but 
when an accused is discharged, it means that there are no materials 
to justify launch of a criminal trial against the accused. Once he is 
discharged, he is no longer an accused. 
17.	 Learned counsel for the respondent has placed reliance on a 
decision of this Court in Keshub Mahindra (supra). However, on 
going through the aforesaid judgment, we are of the view that facts 
in Keshub Mahindra and facts in the present case are poles apart. 
Keshub Mahindra arose out of the in-famous Bhopal Gas tragedy. A 
highly dangerous and toxic gas escaped from a tank in the Bhopal 
factory belonging to Union Carbide India Limited. As a result of 
such leakage, 3828 human beings lost their lives; 18922 suffered 
permanent injuries; 7172 suffered temporary disablement; 1313 
suffered temporary disablement caused by permanent injuries; and 
permanent partial disablement was suffered by 2680 persons. While 
40 human beings suffered from permanent total disablement, a total 
of 2544 animals died. Criminal proceedings were initiated against 
the company and officials belonging to the company. Charges were 
framed under Sections 304 Part II/324/326/429 IPC read with Section 
35 IPC. Some of the accused persons challenged such framing of 
charge before the High Court of M.P. at Jabalpur. However, the High 
Court dismissed the criminal revision application whereafter the 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
513
Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra
matter came up before this Court. In Keshub Mahindra (supra), this 
Court upon perusal of the material on record held that charges under 
Section 304 Part II, 324, 326 and 429 of IPC were not attracted at 
all. Framing of such charges against the concerned accused persons 
fell short of even prima-facie case. It was observed that mere act of 
running a plant as per permission granted by the authorities would 
not be a criminal act. This Court held that:
20.	  …….Consequently in our view taking the entire 
material as aforesaid on its face value and assuming it to 
represent the correct factual position in connection with 
the operation of the plant at Bhopal on that fateful night 
it could not be said that the said material even prima 
facie called for framing of a charge against the accused 
concerned under Section 304 Part II IPC on the specious 
plea that the said act of the accused amounted to culpable 
homicide only because the operation of the plant on that 
night ultimately resulted in deaths of a number of human 
beings and cattle. 
17.1.	 However, considering the gravity of the incident, this Court 
exercised power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India 
and examined the question as to whether the material led 
by the prosecution could prima facie support a charge under 
Section 304A IPC against the concerned accused persons. 
This Court thereafter opined as under:
22. ……..It cannot be gainsaid that the voluminous 
evidence led by the prosecution in this connection at 
least prima facie shows that the accused concerned 
who operated the plant on that fateful night at Bhopal 
could be alleged to be at least guilty of rash and 
negligent act in the way this highly volatile substance 
MIC was handled by them and which ultimately 
escaped in vaporous form and extinguished the lives 
of thousands of human beings and animals apart from 
causing serious bodily injuries to thousands of others. 
*
*
*
*
*
*
However for framing charge under Section 304-A 
on the aforesaid material it cannot be said that the 
said material even prima facie did not point out the 
514
culpability of the accused concerned in running a 
defective plant having a number of operational defects 
and in being prima facie guilty of illegal omissions to 
take safety measures in running such a limping plant 
on that fateful night which resulted into this colossal 
tragedy. The aforesaid conclusion of ours, therefore, 
would make out a prima facie case against accused 
5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 who were in actual charge of running 
of the Bhopal Plant and would require them to face 
the trial for charge under Section 304-A of the IPC.
17.2.	 The aforesaid conclusion of this Court and the consequential 
directions issued was in exercise of power under Article 142 of 
the Constitution of India considering the gravity and magnitude 
of the incident.
17.3.	 In so far facts of the present case is concerned, the two 
deceased employees of appellant No. 1 were undertaking the 
work of decoration of the front side of the shop. As part of the 
said work, they were working on the sign board which was 
approximately at a height of 12 feet from the ground level. For 
this purpose, they were provided with an iron ladder. While 
working on the sign board, they were struck by electricity as a 
result of which they got electrocuted and fell down resulting in 
multiple injuries leading to their death. It was purely accidental. 
On these basic facts, no prima facie case can be said to be 
made out against the appellants for committing an offence 
under Section 304A IPC, not to speak of Section 304 Part II 
IPC. In any case, the Trial Court only considered culpability of 
the appellants qua Section 304 Part II IPC as the committing 
Magistrate had committed the case to the Court of Sessions 
confining the allegations against the appellant to Section 304 
Part II IPC and not Section 304A IPC.
17.4.	 Therefore, Keshub Mahindra (supra) can be of no assistance 
to the respondent.
18.	 That being the position and having regard to the discussions made 
above, we are of the view that both the Trial Court and the High Court 
fell in error in rejecting the discharge applications of the appellants. 
For the reasons stated above, the order of the Trial Court dated 
01.04.2017 and that of the High Court dated 02.11.2017 are hereby set 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
515
Yuvraj Laxmilal Kanther & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra
aside and quashed. Consequently, the discharge applications being 
Exhibit Nos. 6 and 10 in Sessions Case No. 749 of 2014 are hereby 
allowed. Appellants are discharged from Sessions Case No. 749 of 
2014. Consequently, Criminal Appeal No. 2356 of 2024 is allowed.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed. 
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain