[2025] 4 S.C.R. 521 : 2025 INSC 434
Smt. Uma Devi and Ors. 
v. 
Sri. Anand Kumar and Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 4718 of 2025)
02 April 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia* and K. Vinod Chandran, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court was correct in remanding the matter back 
to the trial court, when trial court had allowed the application of 
the defendants/appellants u/Or.7 r.11 CPC, and dismissed the suit 
for partition filed by the plaintiffs in 2023, holding that the suit did 
not disclose proper cause of action and was barred by limitation.
Headnotes†
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – Or.7 r.11 – Return of plaint – 
Limitation – Plaintiffs-respondents, grandchildren of the 
original owner filed suit for partition in 2023 seeking partition 
of the ancestral joint immovable property – Defendants-
appellants, remaining family members filed application u/o.7 
r.11 seeking return of plaint as suit was barred by limitation – 
Case of the appellants that the property had already been 
partitioned in 1968 amongst the sons and had been mutated, 
and family members including aunt of the respondents had 
disposed their property through registered sale deeds in 
1978 – Trial court allowed the application and dismissed the 
suit finding no cause of action – High Court holding that there 
were triable issues allowed the appeal of the respondents and 
remanded the matter back to the trial court:
Held: Plaintiff failed to address the crucial question of when they 
became aware of the registered sale deeds – Pleadings suggest 
suppression of essential facts by the plaintiffs – Partition took place 
way back in 1968 and suit is filed in 2023, after a period of 55 
years – Many of the family members had executed registered sale 
deeds in 1978 which have been attached – Registered document 
provides a complete account of a transaction to any party interested 
in the property – Predecessors of the plaintiffs had notice of the 
* Author
522
registered sale deeds executed in 1978, flowing from the partition 
that took place way back in 1968, by virtue of them being registered 
documents – In the lifetime of plaintiff’s father, these sale deeds 
were not challenged, nor partition was sought – Thus, the suit filed 
in 2023 by the plaintiffs was prima facie barred by law – Plaintiffs 
cannot reignite their rights after sleeping on them for 45 years – 
Trial court rightly allowed the application of the appellants u/or.7 
r.11 holding that the suit filed by the plaintiffs was a meaningless 
litigation, it did not disclose a proper cause of action and was barred 
by limitation – No justifiable reasons for the appellate court to have 
remanded the matter to the trial court – Impugned judgment set 
aside – Or.41 r.1. [Paras 11-13, 17, 18]
Case Law Cited
Suraj Lamp Industries Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Haryana & Anr. [2011] 
11 SCR 848 : (2012) 1 SCC 656; Shri Mukund Bhavan Trust & 
Ors. v. Shrimant Chhatrapati Udayan Raje Pratapsinh Maharaj 
Bhonsle & Anr., 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3844; Madanuri Sri Rama 
Chandra Murthy v. Syed Jalal [2017] 5 SCR 294 : (2017) 13 SCC 
174; Dahiben v. Arvindbhai Kalyanji Bhanusali [2020] 5 SCR 694 : 
(2020) 7 SCC 366 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
List of Keywords
Return of plaint; Suit barred by limitation; Suit for partition; 
Ancestral joint immovable property; Oral partition; Registered sale 
deed; Sleeping on rights; Remand of the matter; Cause of action; 
Limitation; Mutation; Suppression of essential facts; Meaningless 
litigation.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4718 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 08.01.2025 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bengaluru in RFA No. 2374 of 2024
With
Civil Appeal No. 4719 of 2025
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
523
Smt. Uma Devi and Ors. v. Sri. Anand Kumar and Ors.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
C.A. Sundaram, Shailesh Madiyal, Sr. Advs., Abhishek Gupta,  
Ms. Roshini Musa, Dashrath T. M., Zafar Inayat, Praful Shukla, 
Nikhil Kumar Singh, Sudhanshu Prakash, Ms. Anisha Agarwal, 
Ms. Divija Mahajan, Kanishk Sinha.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Ms. Akhila Wali, Nanda Kumar K B, Abhishekh Singh, Ms. Sunayna 
Agarwal, Santhosh N, M/s. Nuli & Nuli, Saket Gogia, Ms. Gauri 
Pande, Ms. Sheetal Maggon, Mansingh, Dhawesh Pahuja, Mrs. 
Vandana Gupta, Rahul Gupta.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sudhanshu Dhulia, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The appellants before this Court are defendants in a suit for partition 
filed by the plaintiffs (respondent nos. 1 to 5 herein) in the year 2023 
under O.S. No. 6768/2023. The parties will be referred to as their 
position in the Trial Court. 
3.	
The defendants moved an application under Order 7 Rule 11 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter ‘CPC’), seeking return of the 
plaint on the grounds that the suit was not maintainable as it was 
barred by limitation as well as on other grounds. The Trial Court 
allowed the application and dismissed the suit.
4.	
Thereafter, plaintiffs (Respondent Nos.1-5 before us) filed an appeal 
before High Court under Order 41 Rule 1 of CPC where High Court 
(hereinafter ‘appellate court’) vide order dated 08.01.2025 held that 
there were triable issues in the case and it could not be dismissed 
merely on an application under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC and consequently 
allowed the appeal, remanding the matter back to the Trial Court.
5.	
This case pertains to a civil dispute concerning an immovable property 
situated at Pattangere Village, Kengeri, Hobli, Bengaluru South Taluk. 
The plaintiffs and defendants belong to the same larger family. 
524
6.	
The original owner of the property was Boranna, who passed away 
leaving behind four sons: Nanjundappa, Siddappa, Basappa, and 
Shivanna. The suit for partition was filed by the grandchildren of 
Shivanna on 16.10.2023, alleging that the family owned ancestral 
joint immovable property and that their legitimate share had been 
denied. Consequently, they sought partition, separate possession 
and allotment of their legitimate share. 
7.	
The four sons of Boranna, namely Nanjundappa, Siddappa, Basappa 
and Shivanna, had their respective families. Shivanna had five 
children namely, Mangalamma, Maribasamma, Drakshayanamma, 
Shadaksharaiah and Varaprasada. While Basappa had six children 
namely, Ganganna, Panchaksharaiah, Mandevappa, Shanthappa, 
Nagarju and Prakash. Nanjundappa and Siddappa also had a family 
of their own. The plaintiffs are the children of Mangalamma. The 
Defendants in the suit represent the remaining family (the appellants 
herein are the representatives of Shanthappa). 
8.	
The defendants raised a primary objection, asserting that the property, 
originally owned by Boranna, had already been partitioned by way 
of an oral partition in the year 1968 amongst his four sons, through 
a family settlement. We have gone through the revenue records, as 
placed before us, and it is evident that this settlement was indeed 
acted upon. The revenue records indicate the names of each of 
Boranna’s four sons and also that the property had been mutated in 
their respective names, the reason assigned for the change in the 
revenue records is the family partition of the year 1968. Additionally, 
the defendants contended that, based on the terms of the family 
settlement, the daughter in law of Shivanna and other family members 
had disposed their property through registered sale deeds executed 
as far back as 1978. It is therefore clear that the plaintiffs had full 
knowledge of this transaction.
9.	
The defendants further argued that the plaintiffs were effectively 
challenging a sale deed executed by their own aunt. Since the suit 
for partition was filed without contesting the sale deed, that itself 
was legally untenable. Moreover, a registered sale deed constitutes 
constructive notice to the world unless it is a case of fraud, coercion, 
or minority and therefore there has to be a presumption in law that 
the plaintiffs had knowledge of the sale deed.
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
525
Smt. Uma Devi and Ors. v. Sri. Anand Kumar and Ors.
10.	 The Trial Court, considering these facts, allowed the application 
under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC and dismissed the suit, finding no cause 
of action for filing the suit. However, the appellate court found that 
there were triable issues that required consideration. The appellate 
court was of the opinion that the plaintiffs had a legitimate claim over 
the joint family properties, and in the absence of any notice to the 
plaintiffs regarding the partition, the suit was remanded back to the 
Trial Court for fresh consideration. 
11.	 The sole argument advanced by the respondents/plaintiffs is that 
the suit was only for partition, filed in the year 2023 and was within 
the limitation period as the limitation will be counted from the date 
of their knowledge of the sale deed. However, upon examining the 
pleadings before the Trial Court and appellate court, it is evident 
that the plaintiff failed to address the crucial question of when 
they became aware of the registered sale deeds. If they had prior 
knowledge of the sale deeds, they failed to specify the exact date 
of such knowledge. Additionally, the pleadings suggest suppression 
of essential facts by the plaintiffs. 
12.	 In the case at hand, partition took place way back in the year 1968, 
which is evident from the revenue record entries. The suit is filed in 
the year 2023, i.e. after a period of 55 years. Further, many of the 
family members had executed registered sale deeds in the year 1978. 
These sale deeds have been attached, and on perusal it is observed 
that these were in fact registered sale deeds. A registered document 
provides a complete account of a transaction to any party interested 
in the property. This Court in the case of Suraj Lamp Industries Pvt. 
Ltd. v. State of Haryana & Anr. (2012) 1 SCC 656 held as under: 
“Registration of a document gives notice to the world that 
such a document has been executed. Registration provides 
safety and security to transactions relating to immovable 
property, even if the document is lost or destroyed. It 
gives publicity and public exposure to documents thereby 
preventing forgeries and frauds in regard to transactions and 
execution of documents. Registration provides information to 
people who may deal with a property, as to the nature and 
extent of the rights which persons may have, affecting that 
property. In other words, it enables people to find out whether 
526
any particular property with which they are concerned, has 
been subjected to any legal obligation or liability and who is 
or are the person(s) presently having right, title, and interest 
in the property. It gives solemnity of form and perpetuate 
documents which are of legal importance or relevance by 
recording them, where people may see the record and 
enquire and ascertain what the particulars are and as far 
as land is concerned what obligations exist with regard to 
them. It ensures that every person dealing with immovable 
property can rely with confidence upon the statements 
contained in the registers (maintained under the said Act) 
as a full and complete account of all transactions by which 
the title to the property may be affected and secure extracts/
copies duly certified”. 
13.	 Applying this settled principle of law, it can safely be assumed that 
the predecessors of the plaintiffs had notice of the registered sale 
deeds (executed in 1978), flowing from the partition that took place 
way back in 1968, by virtue of them being registered documents. 
In the lifetime of Mangalamma, these sale deeds have not been 
challenged, neither has partition been sought. Thus, the suit (filed 
in the year 2023) of the plaintiffs was prima facie barred by law. 
The plaintiffs cannot reignite their rights after sleeping on them for 
45 years. 
14.	 The learned senior counsel for the defendants/appellants, 
Mr. Sundaram, relied upon the decision of this Court in Shri Mukund 
Bhavan Trust & Ors. v. Shrimant Chhatrapati Udayan Raje 
Pratapsinh Maharaj Bhonsle & Anr. (2024 SCC OnLine SC 3844) 
to substantiate the contention that the suit was barred by limitation. 
It was observed as follows:
“16. When a portion of the property has been conveyed 
by court auction and registered in the first instance and 
when another portion has been conveyed by a registered 
sale deed in 1952, there is a constructive notice from the 
date of registration and the presumption under Section 
3 of the Transfer of Property Act, comes into operation. 
The possession, in the present case, also has been rested 
with the appellant before several decades, which operates 
as notice of title.
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
527
Smt. Uma Devi and Ors. v. Sri. Anand Kumar and Ors.
17. XXX
18. Continuing further with the plea of limitation, the Courts 
below have held that 23 (1977) 4 SCC 467 the question 
of the suit being barred by limitation can be decided at 
the time of trial as the question of limitation is a mixed 
question of law and facts. Though the question of limitation 
generally is mixed question of law and facts, when upon 
meaningful reading of the plaint, the court can come to 
a conclusion that under the given circumstances, after 
dissecting the vices of clever drafting creating an illusion 
of cause of action, the suit is hopelessly barred and the 
plaint can be rejected under Order VII Rule 11”.
15.	 In Madanuri Sri Rama Chandra Murthy v. Syed Jalal (2017) 13 
SCC 174, this court laid down the scope of Order 7 Rule 11 CPC :
“The plaint can be rejected under Order VII Rule 11 if 
conditions enumerated in the said provision are fulfilled. 
It is needless to observe that the power under Order VII 
Rule 11, CPC can be exercised by the Court at any stage 
of the suit. The relevant facts which need to be looked 
into for deciding the application are the averments of 
the plaint only. If on an entire and meaningful reading of 
the plaint, it is found that the suit is manifestly vexatious 
and meritless in the sense of not disclosing any right to 
sue, the court should exercise power under Order VII 
Rule 11, CPC. Since the power conferred on the Court 
to terminate civil action at the threshold is drastic, the 
conditions enumerated under Order VII Rule 11 of CPC to 
the exercise of power of rejection of plaint have to be 
strictly adhered to. The averments of the plaint have to 
be read as a whole to find out whether the averments 
disclose a cause of action or whether the suit is barred 
by any law. It is needless to observe that the question as 
to whether the suit is barred by any law, would always 
depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. 
The averments in the written statement as well as the 
contentions of the defendant are wholly immaterial while 
considering the prayer of the defendant for rejection of the 
plaint. Even when, the allegations made in the plaint are 
528
taken to be correct as a whole on their face value, if they 
show that the suit is barred by any law, or do not disclose 
cause of action, the application for rejection of plaint can 
be entertained and the power under Order V11 Rule 11 
of CPC can be exercised. If clever drafting of the plaint 
has created the illusion of a cause of action, the court will 
nip it in the bud at the earliest so that bogus litigation will 
end at the earlier stage”. 
16.	 In Dahiben v. Arvindbhai Kalyanji Bhanusali (2020) 7 SCC 366, 
it is stated as under – 
“The underlying object of Order VII Rule 11 (a) is that if in 
a suit, no cause of action is disclosed, or the suit is barred 
by limitation under Rule 11 (d), the Court would not permit 
the plaintiff to unnecessarily protract the proceedings in 
the suit. In such a case, it would be necessary to put an 
end to the sham litigation, so that further judicial time is 
not wasted”.
17.	 In our considered opinion, the Trial Court had rightly allowed the 
application of the defendants/appellants under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC, 
holding that the suit filed by the plaintiffs was a meaningless litigation, 
that it did not disclose a proper cause of action and was barred by 
limitation. There were thus no justifiable reasons for the appellate 
court to have remanded the matter to the Trial Court. 
18.	 The suit was indeed barred by limitation. Consequently, the impugned 
order dated 08.01.2025 passed by the High Court is set aside, and 
both these appeals are hereby allowed.
19.	 Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain