[2025] 4 S.C.R. 543 : 2025 INSC 428
The Superintending Engineer, Operation, Telangana State 
Southern Power Distribution Company Ltd. & Ors. 
v. 
Ch. Bhaskara Chary
(Civil Appeal No. 4724 of 2025)
02 April 2025
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and  
Joymalya Bagchi, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the respondent ought to be considered for the appointment 
to the post of Lower Division Clerk-LDC or any other suitable or 
supernumerary post, as directed by High Court.
Headnotes†
Service Law – Appointment to the post of LDC – Respondent 
was denied appointment to the post of LDC despite being 
placed higher in the seniority list – High Court directed 
respondent’s appointment to the post of LDC or any other 
suitable or supernumerary post – Correctness: 
Held: High Court rightly held that candidates with lesser man-days 
than the respondent placed relatively lower than him in the seniority 
list were appointed – Respondent’s case must be considered by the 
appellant at par with them – Respondent’s case to be reconsidered 
for appointment to the post of LDC or any other equivalent post 
in which a vacancy may exist. [Paras 11, 15]
List of Keywords
Appointment; Lower Division Clerk (LDC); Andhra Pradesh 
State Electricity Board (APSEB); Seniority List; List of eligible 
candidates; Higher in the list of eligible candidates; Less man-
days; Initial recruitment cadre; Ex-casual labourers category; 
Service certificate; Typewriting exam; Supernumerary post; 
Suitable post; Contractor; Contractually appointed employees; 
Qualified candidates; Minimum qualification; Review committee; 
Workable gradation; Regular appointment; Absorbed on regular 
basis; Future vacancy.
544
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4724 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 02.12.2020 of the High Court 
for the State of Telangana at Hyderabad in WA No. 150 of 2019
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, Sr. Adv., Sravan Kumar Karanam,  
Ms. Shireesh Tyagi, Aniket Singh, Ms. P. Geetanjali.
Advs. for the Respondent:
Basa Mithun Shashank, Vikas Mehta.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
1.	
Leave granted. 
2.	
The present appeal arises from order dated 02.12.2020 by which 
the division bench of the High Court dismissed the appellant’s writ 
appeal against order dated 24.09.2018 wherein the learned single 
judge directed the appellant to consider the respondent’s appointment 
to the post of Lower Division Clerk1 or any other suitable post or any 
other supernumerary post.
3.	
The short facts that are relevant are as follows. The Andhra Pradesh 
State Electricity Board2 issued a notification dated 18.05.1997 to 
fill up 50% vacancies in certain initial recruitment cadres, including 
LDCs, from ex-casual labourers category. Clauses 5 and 6 of this 
notification provided the guidelines for selection of candidates from 
this category, including age, educational qualifications, seniority, 
reservations, and selection committee. Under this policy, APSEB 
issued an advertisement dated 11.03.2001 for appointment to the post 
of LDC from ex-casual labourers category. The respondent sought 
to claim benefit under this policy and applied but his application was 
rejected on 21.01.2002 stating that his service certificate of contract 
labour was not genuine. The appellant challenged this order by way 
1	
 Hereinafter “LDC”. 
2	
 Hereinafter “APSEB”.
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
545
The Superintending Engineer, Operation, Telangana State Southern 
Power Distribution Company Ltd. & Ors. v. Ch. Bhaskara Chary
of a writ petition and the High Court directed the appellant to verify 
his certificate by order dated 24.12.2002. 
4.	
Once again, by order dated 13.03.2003, the respondent’s case was 
rejected as the contractor who issued the service certificate deposed 
that the respondent did not work under him. Further, by order dated 
14.04.2003, the appellant found that the respondent did not qualify 
the typewriting exam and hence could not be considered for the 
post. The respondent challenged the order dated 14.04.2003 in a writ 
petition, which came to be disposed of by the High Court order dated 
01.11.2004 holding that the typewriting qualification is not required 
and therefore, directed the appellant to reconsider his case afresh. 
5.	
Pursuant to the above-referred direction of the High Court, the 
appellant’s Review Committee re-examined the respondent’s case, 
and yet again rejected his appointment by order dated 28.03.2006. 
This time, on a new ground that there is no vacancy in the BC-B 
category in LDC cadre under the 50% quota earmarked for ex-
casual labourers, and that no BC-B candidate who has put in lesser 
man-days than the respondent was appointed. On 15.11.2006, the 
appellant issued a further notification withdrawing the policy dated 
18.05.1997 w.e.f 15.09.2006, subject to the outcome of any pending 
cases before the High Court or this Court.
6.	
The respondent filed a writ petition, only in the year 2008, challenging 
the Review Committee’s order dated 28.03.2006. Initially, by order 
dated 26.04.2017, the learned single judge dismissed the writ petition 
on the ground of delay in approaching the High Court and in view of 
the subsequent withdrawal of the policy. However, the respondent’s 
review petition came to be allowed by the learned single judge by 
order dated 24.09.2018 on the ground that the respondent’s name 
appears at sl. no. 22 in the list of eligible candidates, while those at sl. 
nos. 23 and 28 in the same list were appointed. The Court reasoned 
that since those who were relatively less meritorious were considered 
favourably pursuant to the High Court’s direction in a separate writ 
petition, the respondent must be treated at par with them as he is in 
a relatively better position. Hence, the Court directed the appellant 
to consider the respondent’s case for appointment to the post of 
LDC or any other suitable post or any suitable supernumerary post 
in the same manner as the other case. The appellant’s writ appeal 
came to be dismissed by the order impugned herein, on a similar 
546
reasoning that the respondent’s case must be treated at par with 
the other appointed candidates as he is higher in the list of eligible 
candidates. 
7.	
While issuing notice by the order dated 22.02.2021, this Court took 
note of the appellant’s submission that the list relied on by the High 
Court wherein the respondent appears at sl. no. 22 is not a seniority 
list but only a list of eligible candidates, and also stayed the operation 
of the impugned order. Further, by order dated 26.04.2024, this Court 
directed the appellant to file an affidavit to the following effect:
(i)	
Whether there was any workable gradation/seniority list of the 
contractually appointed employees like the respondent? 
(ii)	
What was the criteria followed for regular appointment in terms 
of the policy decision? 
(iii)	 Whether candidates, who have served for less man-days than 
the respondent on contractual basis, have been absorbed on 
regular basis? 
(iv)	 If so, whether the claim of the respondent was ever considered 
along with such employees? 
(v)	
Whether the respondent can be adjusted against a future 
vacancy as and when arises without payment of any backwages?
8.	
Pursuant to this order, the appellant filed an affidavit dated 04.07.2024 
furnishing the requisite information as follows:
(i)	
There is no workable gradation/seniority list of contractually 
appointed workers like the respondent as they were not 
employees. The list of qualified candidates was prepared based 
on their service certificates from their respective contractors 
and after taking man-days into consideration for conducting 
interviews to the post of LDC. 
(ii)	
That the qualifications for appointment under the notifications 
dated 18.05.1997 and 11.03.2001 are stipulated in paragraphs 
5 and 6 of the 18.05.1997 notification. 
(iii)	 That 6 candidates with less man-days than the respondent have 
been appointed under the 18.05.1997 notification. However, the 
respondent only applied under the second notification issued 
on 11.03.2001. Under this notification, M. Laxminarsu (BC-B), 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
547
The Superintending Engineer, Operation, Telangana State Southern 
Power Distribution Company Ltd. & Ors. v. Ch. Bhaskara Chary
M. Bhaskar (BC-A), and A. Karunakar Reddy (OC), who have 
served less man-days than the respondent, were appointed 
pursuant to the High Court’s direction in certain other writ 
petitions. However, the appointment of M. Laxminarsu (BC-B) 
and M. Bhaskar (BC-A) was prior to the withdrawal of the policy. 
Further, that as per the report of the Inspector of Police dated 
21.01.2002, the respondent’s service certificate is not genuine 
as the contractor who issued the same has deposed that the 
respondent did not work under him. 
(iv)	 The respondent’s case was considered with similarly situated 
persons. However, as his service certificate was not genuine, 
he was not appointed. His appointment was rejected by the 
Review Committee’s speaking order dated 28.03.2006. 
(v)	
Since the respondent’s service certificate is not genuine, he 
cannot be considered for appointment in any future post. 
Further, all vacancies in all cadres are being filled through 
direct recruitment. 
9.	
We have heard Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG for the appellant 
and Mr. Basa Mithun Shashank, learned counsel for the respondent. 
10.	 The appellant’s case before us is that the list relied on by the High 
Court is not a seniority list but only a list of candidates having minimum 
qualification, who are eligible to attend the interview. However, upon 
closer scrutiny, we must reject this submission for the following 
reasons. First, this list has been placed before us by the respondent 
and is titled “Seniority list of qualified candidates for the post of 
L.D.C.s”. A perusal of the list also shows that candidates have been 
arranged in accordance with the date of their first engagement, with 
those engaged prior in time being placed higher on the list. Second, 
in the affidavit dated 04.07.2024, the appellant admits that persons 
with lesser man-days than the respondent were appointed to the 
post under the 11.03.2001 notification, pursuant to the direction of 
the High Court in certain other writ petitions. The relevant portion of 
the affidavit is extracted below:
“It is submitted that six (6) candidates who have served 
for less man-days than the respondent on contractual 
basis, have been absorbed on regular basis in the 1st 
Notification, to which notification the respondent was not 
548
a candidate. Two more candidates namely M. Laxminarsu 
(BC-B), M. Bhaskar (BC-A) and A. Karunakar Reddy (OC) 
who have served for less man-days than the respondent on 
contractual basis have been absorbed on regular basis in 
the 2nd notification on the basis of the order of the Hon’ble 
High Court in Writ Petition Nos. 26515 of 2004 and 858 
of 2009. B.P.Ms. No.36 was withdrawn vide C.O.O (CGM-
HRD) Ms. No. 470, dt. 15.09.2006. It is pertinent to mention 
here that Sri. M Laxminarsu (BC-B) and M. Bhaskar (BC-A)  
were appointed prior to withdrawal of B.P.Ms. No.36.”
11.	 Upon contrasting the appointed candidates, as submitted by the 
appellant, with the seniority list placed before us by the respondent, 
we find that M. Bhaskar (BC-A) and M. Laxminarsu (BC-B) appear at 
sl. nos. 23 and 28 respectively. In this view of the matter, we reject 
the appellant’s submission that the list relied on by the High Court 
was not a seniority list and find that the High Court has correctly 
reasoned that candidates with lesser man-days than the respondent, 
who are placed relatively lower than the respondent in the seniority 
list, have been appointed and hence the respondent’s case must 
be considered by the appellant on par with them. 
12.	 The appellant has also taken other grounds before us, namely that 
the respondent’s service certificate is not genuine as the contractor 
who issued the same has deposed that the respondent did not work 
under him. Further, that there are no vacancies against which the 
respondent can be appointed. These issues cannot be decided by the 
Supreme Court. At this stage, it is necessary to refer to the specific 
directions of the learned single judge of the High Court disposing of 
the writ and review petitions, which we have extracted hereinunder:
“7. …It is also an undisputed fact that the cases of the 
said two persons, who are relatively less meritorious, were 
considered and their cases were considered suitably by 
the respondents. The petitioner in a way is requesting to 
direct the respondents to consider his case in the same 
manner and on par with cases of the above said two 
person notwithstanding the orders in this writ petition. 
In that view of the given to the respondents to consider 
his case in the same manner and on par with the cases 
of the writ petitioners is W.P. No. 2651 of 2004, as he is 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
549
The Superintending Engineer, Operation, Telangana State Southern 
Power Distribution Company Ltd. & Ors. v. Ch. Bhaskara Chary
relatively in a better position in the list of than the above 
said two persons, this court is of the considered view 
that the review petition can be disposed of granting an 
appropriate relief to the petitioner.
8. Accordingly, the review petition is disposed of directing 
the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for 
the post of LDC or any other suitable post or any suitable 
supernumerary post in the same manner as was done in 
the cases of the writ petitioners in W.P No. 265 of 2004 
and on par with the said writ petitioners…”
13.	 It is evident from the above that the appellant was directed to 
consider the case of the respondent in the context of the relative 
facts indicated in the order. 
14.	 The direction of the single judge, when challenged before the division 
bench, culminated in a similar direction to the appellant as even the 
division bench found it appropriate that the respondent’s case, in the 
context of appointment of candidates at sl. nos. 23 and 28, requires 
to be reconsidered. The relevant portion of the division bench’s order 
is extracted below:
“5. … The petitioners in WP.No.2651 of 2004, who are also 
similarly placed as that of the petitioner herein and found 
at Sl.Nos.23 and 28 in the list, were regularized pursuant 
to the order passed in the said writ petition. The petitioner 
herein cannot be given a differential treatment. The case 
of the petitioner deserves to be considered on par with the 
petitioners in WP.No.2651 of 2004 for the reason that the 
petitioner is placed high up in the list of qualified candidates 
than the petitioners in the aforesaid writ petition and that 
the petitioner has got more man-days. The said fact was 
brought to the notice of the learned Single Judge in the 
review petition. Having considered the same, the learned 
Single Judge came to the conclusion that the petitioner has 
to be treated on par with the petitioners in WP.No.2651 
of 2004 and allowed the review petition directing the 
respondents to consider the case of the petitioner to the 
post of LDC or any other suitable post or any suitable 
supernumerary post in the same manner as was done in 
the cases of the writ petitioners in WP. No 2651 of 2024 
550
and on par with the said writ petitioners, notwithstanding 
the order dated 26.04.2017.
6. In view of the above observations, this Court does not 
find any merit in the writ appeal and the same is liable to 
be dismissed. It is, hereby, dismissed.”
15.	 In view of the above, as we have rejected the contention of the 
appellant that the list relied on by the High Court is not a seniority 
list, the respondent’s appointment shall not be rejected on this 
ground. However, while reconsidering the case of the respondent for 
appointment to the post of LDC or any other equivalent post in which 
a vacancy may exist, they may take into account other aspects of the 
matter, which they sought to contend before us, and pass appropriate 
orders. Considering that the present litigation was initiated in 2008, 
we direct the appellant to pass orders as expeditiously as possible, 
preferably within a period of 6 weeks from today. 
16.	 With these directions, we dispose of the present appeal. 
17.	 No order as to costs. 
18.	 Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey