[2025] 1 S.C.R. 93 : 2025 INSC 18
Gopal Krishan & Ors. 
v. 
Daulat Ram & Ors. 
(Civil Appeal No. 13192 of 2024)
02 January 2025
[C.T. Ravikumar and Sanjay Karol,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Impugned in this appeal is the judgment and order of the High 
Court dated 26.03.2018 whereby it has been held that the Will, 
subject matter of controversy, allegedly of one Testator-SR, had 
not been proved, thereby finding that the Lower Appellate Court 
had erred in holding otherwise.
Headnotes†
Succession Act, 1925 – s.63 – SR-Testator was the owner 
of 1/4th share of a land – The Testator had no children and 
resided with his nephew appellant-GK – He executed a Will 
on 07.11.2005 and passed away the next day on 08.11.2005 – 
Having received the said land/property by the virtue of the 
said Will, the appellant transferred the same in favour of his 
four sons – Thereafter, the said property was sold jointly – 
Respondent nos.1 to 7 herein filed a suit seeking declaration 
to the effect inter alia that the Will dated 07.11.2005 was forged 
and fabricated – Trial Court held that the Will cannot be relied 
on – The Will was held to be valid and genuine by the Lower 
Appellate Court, so also it was held that the consequent sale 
deeds cannot be held invalid – However, the High Court held 
that the Will had not been proved – Correctness:
Held: The view taken by the High Court is that the attesting 
witness, in his deposition, did not state that the act of affixing his 
thumb impression on the Will subject matter of dispute was at the 
direction of the Testator and, therefore, the requirement stipulated 
u/s. 63 of the Act was not met – The language of Section 63(c) 
of the Act uses the word ‘OR’ – It states that each Will shall be 
attested by two or more witnesses who have seen the Testator sign 
or affix his mark on the Will OR has seen some other persons sign 
* Author
94
the Will in the presence and by the direction of the Testator OR 
has received a personal acknowledgment from the Testator of his 
signature or mark etc – What flows therefrom is that the witnesses 
who have attested the Will ought to have seen the Testator sign 
or attest his mark OR have seen some other persons sign the Will 
in the presence of and on the direction of the Testator – In the 
instant case, the testimony of DW-1 is clear that he had seen the 
deceased affix his mark on the Will – That alone would ensure 
compliance of Section 63(c) – The part of the Section that employs 
the term ‘direction’ would come into play only when the attestor to 
the Will would have to see some other person signing the Will – 
Such signing would explicitly have to be in the presence and 
upon the direction of the Testator – The requirement of law while 
undoubtedly present, was not of concern in the instant dispute – 
On that count, the High Court to have erred in law – As such the 
impugned judgment of the High Court is set aside – The Judgment 
of the First Appellant Court stand restored – Consequently, the Will 
of SR is valid and so are the subsequent Sale Deeds executed 
by GK. [Paras 11, 13, 14, 15]
Case Law Cited
Meena Pradhan and Others v. Kamla Pradhan and Another (2023) 
9 SCC 734; Shivakumar and Others v. Sharanabasappa and Others 
[2020] 6 SCR 666 : (2021) 11 SCC 277 – relied on.
Janki Narayan Bhoir v. Narayan Mandeo Kadam [2002] Supp. 
5 SCR 175 : (2003) 2 SCC 91; Kanwaljit Kaur v. Joginder 
Singh Badwal (deceased through LRs) RSA No. 5252 of 2012; 
Pankajakshi (Dead) through LRs v. Chandrika and Ors. [2016] 3 
SCR 1018 : (2016) 6 SCC 157 – referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
Justice G.P Singh’s treatise, ‘Principles of Statutory Interpretation
List of Acts
Succession Act, 1925
List of Keywords
Will; Testator; Mental faculties; Attesting Witnesses; Direction of the 
Testator; Attestor to the Will; Section 63 of Succession Act, 1925.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
95
Gopal Krishan & Ors. v. Daulat Ram & Ors. 
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 13192 of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 26.03.2018 of the High Court 
of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in RSA No. 1935 of 2015
Appearances for Parties
T. V. S. Raghavendra Sreyas, Ms. Gayatri Gulati, Siddharth 
Vasudev, Advs. for the Appellants.
Abhimanyu Tewari, Ms. Eliza Bar, Manav Bhalla, Sidhant Awasthy, 
Siddhant Saroha, Praveer Singh, Abhijeet Chaudhary, Advs. for 
the Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol J.
1.	
Impugned in this appeal is the judgment and order of the Punjab 
and Haryana High Court in RSA No. 1935 of 2015 dated 26th 
March 2018 whereby it has been held that the Will, subject matter 
of controversy, allegedly of one Sanjhi Ram, had not been proved, 
thereby finding that the Lower Appellate Court1 had erred in holding 
otherwise. The said Lower Appellate Court had set aside the decree 
of the Civil Court2 which had found that the Will and the subsequent 
mutation of the properties enumerated therein was bad in law, as 
the Will was “illegal ”, “null ” and “void ”. The question that falls for 
our consideration is-
“What do the words “by the direction of the testator” as 
they appear in Section 63 (c) of the Indian Succession 
Act, 1925 mean? Is the term to be interpreted liberally 
or strictly? Consequently, was the High Court correct in 
holding, in agreement with the Civil Court, that the Will, 
subject matter of dispute, stood not proved?”
1	
Civil Appeal No. 27 of 2011, judgment dated 5th September 2014 delivered by The Court of Additional 
District Judge (Adhoc), Fast Track Court, Gurdaspur.
2	
Civil Suit No. 282 of 2006, judgment dated 24th February 2011 delivered by Civil Judge, Senior Division, 
Gurdaspur.
96
2.	
Facts, shorn of unnecessary details, as they appear from the record 
are as follows: -
2.1	 Sanjhi Ram,3 was the owner of 1/4th share of land measuring 
40 canals, 3 marlas, comprised in Khewat no.7, Khatauni no.9, 
Rett no. 9, Kila no. 9/8 situated in the Revenue Estate of Village 
Umarpura, Khurd, Tehsil and District Gurdaspur, Punjab. His 
share in the aforesaid property was to the extent of 10 canals 
and 1 marla.4 
2.2	 The Testator had no children and resided with his nephew Gopal 
Krishan.5 He executed a Will on 7th November 2005 and passed 
away the next day on 8th November 2005. The death certificate 
issued by the competent authority is dated 19th November 2005. 
2.3	 Having received the property by virtue of the aforesaid Will, 
the appellant transferred the same in favour of his four sons 
viz., Ravinder Kumar; Rajinder Kumar; Satish Kumar and Roop 
Lal vide Sale Deed dated 16th January 2006. The said property 
was sold jointly for a sum of Rs.98,000/- to Madhu Sharma 
and Meena Kumari, vide Sale Deed dated 3rd February 2006. 
2.4	 Respondent nos.1 to 7 herein filed a Suit bearing No. 282 of 
2006 before the Civil Court, seeking declaration to the effect 
inter alia (i) that the plaintiffs (respondents herein) were the 
owners of Sanjhi Ram’s 1/4th share; (ii) that the Will dated 
7th November 2005 was forged and fabricated; and (iii) that 
the mutation carried out subsequent to the execution of such 
a Will is illegal and not binding on the plaintiffs. 
2.5	 By way of written statement dated 24th April 2006 the contentions 
made in the plaint were denied. 
3.	
The Trial Court framed seven issues primarily pertaining to, 
(a) validity of the Will subject matter of the present lis; (b) whether 
the plaintiffs are estopped by their act and conduct from filing the 
suit; and (c) whether the plaintiffs have the locus standi to file the 
suit and whether the same is maintainable, within limitation and filed 
with sufficient court fees, being affixed thereto.
3	
Testator
4	
Suit property
5	
Hereafter appellant no.1
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
97
Gopal Krishan & Ors. v. Daulat Ram & Ors. 
3.1	 Of primary importance to the present adjudication is the findings 
qua issue no.1. The relevant extracts from the judgment of the 
Civil Court are as below:-
“10. On going through the file I find it has been admitted 
by the witnesses of the defendants that Sanjhi Ram 
remained ill. The claim of the Plaintiffs is that he died on 
7.11.2005 and the claim of the Defendants that the died 
on 8.11.2005. The defendants did not being the death 
certificate of Shri Sanjhi Ram on the file and thus failed 
to rebut the contention of the Plaintiffs. The visit of Sanjhi 
Ram at Tehsil Gurdaspur on 7.11.2005 and then executing 
the Will on the said day without any registration of the 
same and adjustment of lines on the page in the lower 
portion and further adjusting the seal by the scribe in the 
left margin and further the place the thumb mark alleged 
to be of Sanjhi Ram make the will suspicious which cannot 
be relied on.”
4.	
On appeal the Lower Appellate Court relied on a judgment returned 
by a Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad and 
one judgment of the Rajasthan High Court to hold that even if the 
Testator was ill, so long as his mental faculties were not affected, no 
inference could be drawn that he was not of sound state of mind or 
that he could not execute a Will. In the facts of the instant case, it 
was observed that nowhere did the case record reflect that Sanjhi 
Ram’s mental faculties were in any way questionable nor was he 
disoriented or affected by illness. In regard to other observations of 
the Civil Court reproduced (supra) the Lower Appellate Court held 
as under:-
“16. As noted above, learned Lower Court had found 
the Will Ex.D1 suspicious also for the reason that the 
spacing in between last lines in this Will was narrower 
than the space available between lines in remaining 
upper part of this Will. In this context learned counsel 
for the appellants has relied upon Judgment Bahadur 
Singh versus Poonam Sin h & Ors, (Supra) which applies 
to the facts of the case in hand. Vide it Hon’ble High 
Court categorically observed that merely because the 
spacing of last two three lines is less than the earlier 
lines it cannot be said that the Will is not genuine. To 
98
accommodate writing in one page, sometimes last lines 
are written closely and therefore such circumstances 
should not be considered as adverse circumstances. In 
the case in hand also Will Ex.P1 is on a single page. 
Moreover, the lines on more than two third of this page 
have equal spacing between them. It is in the last 1/3rd 
part of the page of Will that spacing goes on narrowing. 
When the Will is on a single page only narrowing of 
space towards end of the writing has to be taken as a 
natural phenomenon.”
Having observed as above, the Will was held to be valid and genuine, 
so also it was held that the consequent sale deeds cannot be held 
invalid. The judgment of the lower Court was set aside.
5.	
In second appeal the High Court found that: -
(A)	 The reduction of space while concluding the Will had “totally 
escaped the notice of the Court’s below ”, and that this was a 
glaring illegality and perversity. The attesting witness, Janak 
Raj (DW-1) had not stated in his examination that his thumb 
print had been appended to the Will upon the direction of the 
Testator which is a requirement in law. For such a conclusion, 
reliance was placed on Janki Narayan Bhoir v. Narayan 
Mandeo Kadam 6 and the Judgment of the Division Bench of 
the High Court titled Kanwaljit Kaur v. Joginder Singh Badwal 
(deceased through LRs).7
(B)	 Placing reliance on the Constitution Bench Judgment of this 
Court in Pankajakshi (Dead) through LRs v. Chandrika and 
Ors.,8 the Court without framing substantial questions of law set 
aside the judgment of the Lower Appellate Court. The appeal 
preferred by the present respondents was thus allowed. 
6.	
Having traversed the Courts below as aforesaid, the dispute stands 
before us. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. 
6	
[2002] Supp. 5 SCR 175 : (2003) 2 SCC 91
7	
RSA No.5252 of 2012
8	
[2016] 3 SCR 1018 : (2016) 6 SCC 157
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
99
Gopal Krishan & Ors. v. Daulat Ram & Ors. 
7.	
Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 runs thus:-
“63. Execution of unprivileged Wills.—
Every testator, not being a soldier employed in an 
expedition or engaged in actual warfare, or an airman so 
employed or engaged, or a mariner at sea, shall execute 
his Will according to the following rules:—
(a)The testator shall sign or shall affix his mark to the Will, 
or it shall be signed by some other person in his presence 
and by his direction.
(b)The signature or mark of the testator, or the signature 
of the person signing for him, shall be so placed that it 
shall appear that it was intended thereby to give effect to 
the writing as a Will.
(c) The Will shall be attested by two or more witnesses, 
each of whom has seen the testator sign or affix his 
mark to the Will or has seen some other person sign 
the Will, in the presence and by the direction of the 
testator, or has received from the testator a personal 
acknowledgement of his signature or mark, or the signature 
of such other person; and each of the witnesses shall sign 
the Will in the presence of the testator, but it shall not  
be necessary that more than one witness be present at 
the same time, and no particular form of attestation shall 
be necessary.”
(emphasis supplied)
As seen above, Section 63(c) enumerates five distinct situations:
A is the testator of the Will in question. B and C have signed the 
Will. For B and C to qualify as attestors,-
Situation 1:
Each of them has to have seen A sign the will or put his mark on it;
OR
Situation 2:
They should have seen some other person, let’s say D sign the will 
in the presence of and on the direction of A;
OR
100
Situation 3:
They ought to have received a personal acknowledgment from A to 
the effect that A had signed the Will or has affixed his mark thereon;
With the use of the conjunctive, ‘and’ one further stipulation has 
been provided:
B, C, D or any other witness is required to sign the Will in the 
presence of A however it is not necessitated that more than one 
witness be present at the same time. 
The statutory language also clarifies that B and C, the attestors, are 
not required to follow any particular prescribed format.
8.	
The requisites for proving of a Will are well established. They were 
recently reiterated in a Judgment of this Court in Meena Pradhan 
and others v. Kamla Pradhan and Another.9 See also Shivakumar 
and Others v. Sharanabasappa and Others.10 The principles as 
summarised by the former are reproduced as below:-
“…10.1. The court has to consider two aspects : firstly, 
that the will is executed by the testator, and secondly, that 
it was the last will executed by him;
10.2. It is not required to be proved with mathematical 
accuracy, but the test of satisfaction of the prudent mind 
has to be applied.
10.3. A will is required to fulfil all the formalities required 
under Section 63 of the Succession Act, that is to say:
(a) The testator shall sign or affix his mark to the will or 
it shall be signed by some other person in his presence 
and by his direction and the said signature or affixation 
shall show that it was intended to give effect to the writing 
as a will;
(b) It is mandatory to get it attested by two or more 
witnesses, though no particular form of attestation is 
necessary;
9	
(2023) 9 SCC 734
10	
[2020] 6 SCR 666 : (2021) 11 SCC 277
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
101
Gopal Krishan & Ors. v. Daulat Ram & Ors. 
(c) Each of the attesting witnesses must have seen the 
testator sign or affix his mark to the will or has seen some 
other person sign the will, in the presence and by the 
direction of the testator, or has received from the testator 
a personal acknowledgment of such signatures;
(d) Each of the attesting witnesses shall sign the will in 
the presence of the testator, however, the presence of all 
witnesses at the same time is not required;
10.4. For the purpose of proving the execution of the will, 
at least one of the attesting witnesses, who is alive, subject 
to the process of court, and capable of giving evidence, 
shall be examined;
10.5. The attesting witness should speak not only about 
the testator’s signatures but also that each of the witnesses 
had signed the will in the presence of the testator;
10.6. If one attesting witness can prove the execution of 
the will, the examination of other attesting witnesses can 
be dispensed with;
10.7. Where one attesting witness examined to prove 
the will fails to prove its due execution, then the other 
available attesting witness has to be called to supplement 
his evidence;
10.8. Whenever there exists any suspicion as to the 
execution of the will, it is the responsibility of the propounder 
to remove all legitimate suspicions before it can be 
accepted as the testator’s last will. In such cases, the 
initial onus on the propounder becomes heavier;
10.9. The test of judicial conscience has been evolved for 
dealing with those cases where the execution of the will 
is surrounded by suspicious circumstances. It requires 
to consider factors such as awareness of the testator as 
to the content as well as the consequences, nature and 
effect of the dispositions in the will; sound, certain and 
disposing state of mind and memory of the testator at the 
time of execution; testator executed the will while acting 
on his own free will;
102
10.10. One who alleges fraud, fabrication, undue influence 
et cetera has to prove the same. However, even in the 
absence of such allegations, if there are circumstances 
giving rise to doubt, then it becomes the duty of the 
propounder to dispel such suspicious circumstances by 
giving a cogent and convincing explanation;
10.11. Suspicious circumstances must be “real, germane 
and valid” and not merely “the fantasy of the doubting mind 
[Shivakumar v. Sharanabasappa (2021) 11 SCC 277] ”. 
Whether a particular feature would qualify as “suspicious” 
would depend on the facts and circumstances of each 
case. Any circumstance raising suspicion legitimate in 
nature would qualify as a suspicious circumstance, for 
example, a shaky signature, a feeble mind, an unfair and 
unjust disposition of property, the propounder himself taking 
a leading part in the making of the will under which he 
receives a substantial benefit, etc.”
9.	
This case raises the question whether the third requirement u/s 63 of 
the Act stands met in the present case particularly as to the contours 
of the meaning of the phrase ‘direction of the testator’.
10.	 The word ‘direction’, as discussed in the Cambridge Dictionary, can 
be employed in various contexts – (a) giving instructions to someone 
to find a particular place or location; (b) looking to an area or position 
where someone is placed; (c) a sense of direction i.e., the ability 
to find or locate a particular place; (d) control or instruction; and 
(e) information or orders telling somebody how or what to do.
11.	 The present case concerns (d) and/or (e) as above. The view taken 
by the High Court is that the attesting witness, in his deposition, did 
not state that the act of affixing his thumb impression on the Will 
subject matter of dispute was at the direction of the Testator and, 
therefore, the requirement stipulated u/s 63 Iof the Act was not met.
12.	 The above said conclusion of the High Court is based on the testimony 
of Janak Raj, who is DW-1. His testimony reads as under:-
“1. That I know both the parties. I also knew Sanjhi Ram, 
Son of Shri Tulsi Ram, who was a resident of our Village. He 
was residing at Gopal Krishan. Sanjhi Ram died issueless. 
His wife is predeceased him. Gopal Krishan used to serve 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
103
Gopal Krishan & Ors. v. Daulat Ram & Ors. 
deceased Sanjhi Ram and was looking after him. Shri 
Sanjhi Ram who was real uncle of Gopal Krishan, while 
possessed of sound disposing mind, executed a valid Will 
on 7.1.2005 in favour of Gopal Krishan. I have seen the 
original WILL which bears my thumb impression. The WILL 
is Ex.D.1. The same was scribed by the Deed Writer at 
the instance of Shri Sanjhi Ram. He further scribing the 
same, read over and explained the contents of the WILL 
Ex.D1. Sh. Sanjhi Ram after admitting the contents of the 
WILL, appended his thumb impression in my presence and 
as well as in the presence of other attesting witness Sh. 
Tarsem Lal and thereafter I and other attesting witness 
put my thumb impression and signature respectively. On 
the basis of WILL Ex.D.1 Shri Gopal Krishan defendant is 
owner in possession of the land of the land of Shri Sanjhi 
Ram. The Plaintiffs have got no right, title or interest in 
the land let by Shri Sanjhi Ram. …” 
(emphasis supplied)
13.	 The language of Section 63(c)of the Act uses the word ‘OR’. It states 
that each Will shall be attested by two or more witnesses who have 
seen the Testator sign or affix his mark on the Will OR has seen some 
other persons sign the Will in the presence and by the direction of 
the Testator OR has received a personal acknowledgment from the 
Testator of his signature or mark etc. What flows therefrom is that 
the witnesses who have attested the Will ought to have seen the 
Testator sign or attest his mark OR have seen some other persons 
sign the Will in the presence of and on the direction of the Testator. 
The judgment relied on by the learned Single Judge in the impugned 
judgment, i.e., Kanwaljit Kaur (supra) holds that the deposition of 
the attesting witness in the said case had not deposed in accordance 
with Section 63(c) of the Act, where two persons had undoubtedly 
attested the Will, but the aspect of the ‘direction of the testator’ was 
absent from such deposition. In the considered view of this Court, 
the Learned Single Judge fell in error in arriving at such a finding 
for the words used in the Section, which already stands extracted 
earlier,read-“or has seen some other person sign the Will, in the 
presence and by the direction of the testator, or has received from 
the testator a…”. That being the case, there is no reason why the 
‘or’ employed therein, should be read as ‘and’. After all, it is well 
104
settled that one should not read ‘and ’ as ‘or ’ or vice-versa unless 
one is obliged to do so by discernible legislative intent. Justice G.P 
Singh’s treatise, ‘Principles of Statutory Interpretation’ tells us that 
the word “or ” is normally disjunctive while the word “and” is normally 
conjunctive. Further, it is equally well settled as a proposition of law 
that the ordinary, grammatical meaning displayed by the words of the 
statute should be given effect to unless the same leads to ambiguity, 
uncertainty or absurdity. None of these requirements, to read a word 
is which is normally disjunctive, as conjunctive herein, are present. 
14.	 In the present case the testimony of DW-1 is clear that he had seen 
the deceased affix his mark on the Will. That alone would ensure 
compliance of Section 63(c). The part of the Section that employs 
the term ‘direction’ would come into play only when the attestor to 
the Will would have to see some other person signing the Will. Such 
signing would explicitly have to be in the presence and upon the 
direction of the Testator.
15.	 The requirement of law while undoubtedly present, was not of concern 
in the instant dispute. On that count, we find the High Court to have 
erred in law. As such the impugned judgment of the High Court with 
the particulars as described in para 1 is set aside. The Judgment of 
the First Appellant Court stand restored. Consequently, the Will of 
Sanjhi Ram is valid and so are the subsequent Sale Deeds executed 
by Gopal Krishan.
Appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms. Pending application(s) if 
any shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan