[2025] 1 S.C.R. 239 : 2025 INSC 2
Municipal Corporation of Delhi  
v. 
Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc.
(Civil Appeal Nos. 7463-7464 of 2023)
02 January 2025
[B.R. Gavai* and K.V. Viswanathan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the application under Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003 
could have been made by the Appellant-MCD, a “local authority” 
within the meaning of Section 2(41) of the Act. 
Headnotes†
Electricity Act, 2003 – ss.63, 86, 2(41), 174, 175 – Determination 
of tariff by bidding process – Functions of the State 
Commission – Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 – r.15 – 
Appellant, if could issue tariff based bid and Request for 
Proposal (RfP) for setting up the Waste to Energy Project – 
Petition filed by appellant before the Delhi Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (DERC) for approval of the bidding process of 
the Project – Waste to Energy Research & Technology Council 
(WTERT) challenged the authority of the appellant to issue the 
tariff-based bid and the RfP in setting up the Project – DERC 
dismissed the petition of WTERT while allowed that of the 
appellant and approved the bid tariff of Rs.7.38/KWh for the 
project and directed the Distribution Licensee to negotiate the 
terms of the Power Purchase Agreement with the appellant – 
Orders of DERC set aside by APTEL holding that since the 
appellant was neither a distribution licensee nor a generating 
company, it had no jurisdiction to file an application u/s.63 
for adoption of tariff – Challenge to:
Held: Impugned judgment quashed and set aside – Appellant was 
establishing the Project in order to perform its statutory obligations – 
DERC granted its approval to the tariff with certain conditions after 
taking into consideration all the relevant factors – However, the same 
was upset by APTEL on a hyper-technical ground – Under/s.63, the 
* Author
240
Appropriate Commission is entitled to adopt the tariff if such tariff 
has been determined through a transparent process of bidding in 
accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central Government – 
Power of the Commission is notwithstanding anything contained 
in s.62 – A plain reading of s.63 shows that it does not restrict 
its invocation only by Discoms or generating companies – The 
interpretation of APTEL is adding words in s.63 which the legislature 
did not intend to – Further, APTEL could not have read s.63 in 
isolation – s.63 will have to be read in harmony with s.86(1)(b) – The 
legislature intended that the State Commission while exercising its 
powers u/s.63 shall adopt the tariff when it has been determined 
in the bidding process – However, while adopting the same it will 
have to be satisfied that the same is done in a transparent manner 
and as to whether the interests of the generators/Discoms are 
balanced with the interests of the consumers – Reading s.63 in the 
manner as interpreted by the APTEL, would impose unnecessary 
restrictions on the powers and duties of the State Commission 
u/s.86(1)(b) which are of a very wide amplitude – Furthermore, 
there is no inconsistency between the provisions of s.63 and r.15, 
SWM Rules – r.15 enacted under the Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986, mandates the appellant to undertake WTE project – Insofar 
as the WTE projects are concerned, the provisions under the Act 
will have to be read in addition to the provisions u/r.15 and not in 
derogation thereof – Also, s.86(1)(e) r/w r.6.4 of the Tariff Policy 
provide for promoting cogeneration and generation of electricity from 
renewable sources of energy by providing suitable measures for 
connectivity with the grid and sale of electricity from such sources, 
a percentage of the total consumption of electricity in the area of a 
distribution licensee – APTEL also failed to take into consideration 
that the WTE project in question was in the larger public interest 
providing for disposal of the huge quantity of waste generated in the 
city of Delhi – Orders of DERC affirmed – Environment (Protection) 
Act, 1986. [Paras 28, 29, 35, 37, 41, 42, 48, 49, 50, 52, 54-56, 58]
Interpretation of Statutes – Electricity Act, 2003 – s.63 – 
Interpretation of – Literal interpretation – Courts by judicial 
interpretation not to add, alter, or delete the words when the 
statute upon its plain reading is capable of giving a meaning 
as intended by the legislature:
Held: When the statute read in a literal manner is capable of 
giving meaning to the provision that the legislation intended to 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
241
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
and does not lead to any absurdity, it is not permissible by judicial 
interpretation to add, alter, or delete any words to such a statute – 
Upon a plain reading of the provisions of s.63, the meaning 
gathered does not result in any absurdity thus, addition of words 
in the statute by judicial interpretation is wholly impermissible. 
[Paras 30, 36]
Electricity Act, 2003 – s.86 – Duty of the State Commission – 
Discussed.
Case Law Cited
Pune Municipal Corporation v. Sus Road Baner Vikas Manch and 
others [2024] 9 SCR 374 : (2024) 9 SCC 1; Energy Watchdog 
v. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and others [2017] 3 
SCR 153 : (2017) 14 SCC 80; Punjab State Power Corporation 
Limited and another v. Emta Coal Limited [2021] 11 SCR 772 : 
(2022) 2 SCC 1; Jaipur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited and others v. 
MB Power (Madhya Pradesh) Limited and others [2024] 1 SCR 
909 : (2024) 8 SCC 513; Sanjay Ramdas Patil v. Sanjay and 
others [2021] 11 SCR 640 : (2021) 10 SCC 306 – referred to.
List of Acts
Electricity Act, 2003; Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016; 
National Tariff Policy 2016; Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
List of Keywords
Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD); “local authority”; Competitive 
bidding process; Determination of tariff; Bid tariff; Approval of 
tariff; Appropriate Commission; State Commission; Solid Waste 
Management; Statutory obligations; Notice Inviting Tender; Tariff 
based bid; Request for Proposal (RfP); Financial Bids; Transparent 
process of bidding; Waste to Energy Project at Narela Bawana, 
Delhi; WTE project; Procurement of power; Delhi Electricity 
Regulatory Commission (DERC); APTEL; Waste to Energy 
Research & Technology Council; Tariff Policy; Power Purchase 
Agreement (PPA); Distribution Companies; Distribution Licensee; 
Discoms or generating companies/generators; Cogeneration, 
generation of electricity; Sale of electricity; Electricity from 
renewable sources of energy; Bidding Evaluation Committee; Plain 
reading; Literal interpretation; Judicial interpretation; Harmonious 
construction.
242
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 7463-7464 
of 2023
From the Judgment and Order dated 31.08.2023 of the Appellate 
Tribunal for Electricity at New Delhi in DFR Nos. 245 and 247 of 2023
Appearances for Parties
Ramji Srinivasan, Sr. Adv., Ms. Swapna Seshadri, Nikunj Dayal, 
Utkarsh Singh, Ms. Sneha Singh Baghel, Ms. Namrata Saraogi, 
Parth Bhalla, Advs. for the Appellant.
B.V. Patil, Sr. Adv., Aditya Ranjan, Krishna M. Singh, Anil C Nishani, 
Mrs. Deepti Singh (for M/s. Krishna & Nishani Law Chambers), 
Ms. Ishita Jain, Anand Kumar Shrivastava, Ms. Priya Goyal,  
Ms. Eesha Sharma, Buddy Ranganathan, Dushyant Manocha,  
Ms. Anannya Ghosh, Brian Henry Moses, Ms. Mrinalini Mishra, 
Suresh Chandra Tripathy, Advs. for the Respondents.
Pukhrambam Ramesh Kumar, Ms. Molshree Bhatnaagar, Deepak 
Thukar, Punyam Bhutani, Advs. for the Impleader.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
B.R. Gavai, J.
1.	
The present appeals filed under Section 125 of the Electricity Act, 
20031 arise out of the Impugned common final judgment and order 
of the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity at New Delhi2 dated 31st 
August 2023 passed in DFR No. 245 of 2023 and DFR No. 247 
of 2023 which were both filed by the Respondent No. 1 herein- 
Mr. Gagan Narang. The APTEL disposed of the appeals and set 
aside the orders of the Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission3 
dated 6th and 7th March 2023. Vide the order dated 6th March 2023 
the DERC had dismissed the petition filed by Waste to Energy 
1	
‘The Act’ hereinafter
2	
‘APTEL’ hereinafter
3	
‘DERC’ hereinafter
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
243
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
Research & Technology Council4 challenging the authority of the 
Appellant herein  - Municipal Corporation of Delhi,5 to issue the 
tariff-based bid and Request for Proposal6 for setting up the Waste 
to Energy7 project at Narela Bawana, Delhi. Vide order of 7th March 
2023, the DERC had approved the bid tariff of Rs. 7.38/KWh for the 
project and had directed the Distribution Licensee to negotiate the 
terms of the Power Purchase Agreement8 with the Appellant-MCD.
2.	
Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeals are:
2.1	 The Appellant-MCD organized a meeting with the Distribution 
Licensees in Delhi and other stakeholders on 14th May 2022. It 
was agreed that a tariff-based bidding model may be adopted 
and the details about the same, including the volume of waste, 
total power generation, and other considerations for the proposed 
project were decided. It was further decided that the sale of 
power be distributed amongst the Distribution Licensees as 
per their ‘Renewable Purchase Obligation’. The Appellant was 
authorized to conduct the bidding process as per the regulations 
and requirements of Section 63 of the Act for the proposed 
WTE project. The same was put in writing and was detailed in 
the Minutes of Meeting dated 30th May 2022. 
2.2	 The Appellant-MCD, issued the Notice Inviting Tender9 and 
the RfP dated 15th July 2022 whereby the tariff-based bids 
for procurement of power under WTE project for Solid WTE 
Processing Facility with a minimum 28 MW capacity in Narela 
Bawana, New Delhi, for 3000 (+/- 20%) TPD of MSW10 were 
invited. The documents for the same were sent to the DERC 
for its consideration. 
2.3	 The DERC, vide letter dated 24th August 2022 directed the 
Appellant-MCD to file a petition for approval of PPA, RfP, etc. 
The letter also contained the details of the petitions filed by 
4	
‘WTERT’ hereinafter
5	
‘Appellant-MCD’ hereinafter
6	
‘RfP’ hereinafter
7	
‘WTE’ hereinafter
8	
‘PPA’ hereinafter
9	
‘NIT’ hereinafter
10	
‘Project’ hereinafter
244
South Delhi Municipal Corporation and the East Delhi Waste 
Processing Co. Ltd. seeking similar approvals, which were 
granted by the DERC through separate orders. An evaluation 
committee was also constituted for the evaluation of bids and 
other related issues. The Appellant-MCD issued a notice that 
the bidding process dated 15th July 2022 were closed and a 
new NIT was issued on 21st October 2022 with identical terms 
as the earlier NIT. 
2.4	 The WTERT filed a Petition No. 65 of 2022 before the DERC 
inter alia challenging the authority of the Appellant-MCD for 
issuing the tariff-based bid and the RfP in setting up the Project. 
During the pendency of this petition, the bidding process 
was undertaken, and on 14th November 2022, bids were 
received from M/s JITF Urban Infrastructure Ltd. and M/s JBM 
Renewables Pvt. Ltd. A meeting of the Evaluation committee 
was held, and the documents submitted by the bidders keeping 
in mind the requirement of the RfP document were discussed, 
and on recommendation of the committee, the bids of both the 
bidders were declared to be technically qualified and their bids 
were allowed to be opened. The Regional Centre for Urban & 
Environmental Studies11 calculated the levelized tariff based on 
the RfP and the same was communicated and calculated as:
Name of the Bidder
Levelized Tariff 
(Rs/KWh)
M/s JITF Urban Infrastructure Limited
7.380
M/s JBM Renewable Pvt. Limited
9.909
2.5	 The Financial Bids were evaluated by the Evaluation Committee 
and its recommendation report dated 26th November 2022 was 
issued. It was stated in the report that in accordance with the 
terms of the RfP, the “Lowest Bidder” for a project was to be 
the qualified bidder and the lowest evaluated levelized tariff 
shall be the selected bidder for the Project. M/s JITF Urban 
Infrastructure Limited was selected to be the lowest bidder with 
a levelized tariff bid of Rs. 7.380/KWh. It was further mentioned 
that a meeting of the Evaluation Committee was held on 6th 
11	
‘RCUES’ hereinafter
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
245
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
October 2022 for the consideration of the Financial Model for 
price bid evaluation prepared by RCUES. The representative of 
RCUES presented the financial model and after deliberation, the 
committee reached a consensus on the key assumptions taken 
and had arrived at a levelized tariff of Rs. 6.73/KWh. Since, 
there existed a difference between the tariff according to the 
financial model and the tariff by the lowest bidder, a justification/
calculation for arriving at the quoted bid was requested from 
M/s JITF Urban Infrastructure Limited, and the same was 
considered by the committee. It was further mentioned, that 
after detailed deliberations, the committee was of the opinion 
that the bids had been received through a competitive bidding 
process and the lowest bid of Rs. 7.380/KWh was arrived at, 
through a competitive and transparent bidding process. It was 
further mentioned that the Appellant-MCD herein has no benefit 
or loss accruing out of this as the power is to be procured by 
the Distribution Companies in accordance with the approval of 
tariff by DERC. The report was then forwarded to the DERC 
as the final approval was to be given by it.
2.6	 Pursuant to the same, the Appellant-MCD filed a Petition No. 72 
of 2022 before the DERC for the approval of the bidding process 
of the Project. 
2.7	 The DERC, vide order dated 6th March 2023, dismissed the 
Petition No. 65 filed by WTERT and inter alia held that the 
Appellant-MCD is mandated under the Solid Waste Management 
Rules, 201612 to construct, operate, and maintain the solid waste 
processing facilities. Vide order dated 7th March 2023, the DERC 
in Petition No. 72 filed by the Appellant-MCD herein, approved 
the bid tariff of Rs. 7.38/KWh for the project and directed the 
Distribution Licensee to negotiate terms of the PPA with the 
Appellant-MCD and place a signed copy of the PPA before the 
DERC within three months. 
2.8	 Aggrieved, two separate appeals were filed by the Respondent 
No. 1 herein bearing DFR Nos. 245 of 2023 and 247 of 2023 
against the orders dated 7th March 2023 and 6th March 2023 
respectively. 
12	
‘SWM Rule 2016’ hereinafter 
246
2.9	 The APTEL, vide the Impugned common final judgment and 
order dated 31st August 2023 disposed of the appeals and set 
aside both the orders dated 6th and 7th March 2023 passed by 
the DERC on the ground that the DERC lacked jurisdiction to 
entertain and adjudicate upon a petition filed by the Appellant-
MCD herein.
2.10	Aggrieved, the present appeals are filed under Section 125 of 
the Electricity Act, 2003.
3.	
We have heard Mr. Ramji Srinivasan, learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the Appellant and Mr. Basava Prabhu Patil, learned 
Senior Counsel appearing for the Respondent No.1, Mr. Krishna M. 
Singh, Ms. Ishita Jain, Mr. Buddy Ranganathan, Mr. Suresh Chandra 
Tripathi, learned counsel appearing for Respondent Nos. 2, 3, 4 & 
5, and 9 respectively and Mr. Pukhrambam Ramesh Kumar, learned 
counsel for the applicant.
4.	
Mr. Ramji Srinivasan, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
Appellant submits that the APTEL has grossly erred in restricting 
the applicability of Sections 63 and 86(1)(b) of the Act only to the 
distribution licensee13 or generating company insofar as the filing of 
application for adoption of tariff is concerned. He submits that the 
provisions of Section 86(1)(b) of the Act would reveal that a wide 
power is bestowed upon the State Commission to regulate electricity 
purchase and procurement process of Discoms including the price 
at which electricity shall be procured from the generating companies 
or licensees or from other sources.
5.	
Learned Senior Counsel further submits that the Appellant-MCD, 
which is a statutory body under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 
has been put under statutory obligation under Rule 15(v)(b) of the 
SWM Rules 2016 to proceed for setting up of the WTE projects. It 
is submitted that this statutory duty has also been recognized by 
this Court in the case of Pune Municipal Corporation v. Sus Road 
Baner Vikas Manch and others.14
6.	
The learned Senior Counsel further submits that Rule 6.4(1)(ii) 
and (2) of the National Tariff Policy 2016 mandates Discoms to 
13	
‘Discoms’ hereinafter
14	
[2024] 9 SCR 374 : (2024) 9 SCC 1
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
247
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
procure 100% of the power produced from all WTE plants either 
through Section 62 (normative tariff process) or through Section 63 
(competitive based mechanism). 
7.	
It is further submitted that Section 175 of the Act itself provides that 
the provisions of the Act are in addition to and not in derogation of 
any other law for the time being in force. It is, therefore, submitted 
that the mandate for setting up the WTE project by MCD has to be 
read in consonance with the provisions of the Environment (Protection) 
Act, 1986 and the Rules framed thereunder. 
8.	
It is submitted that for WTE projects, no guidelines have been framed 
by the Central Government for conducting the bidding and accordingly 
the DERC has exercised its powers to regulate under Section 86(1)(b) 
of the Act to approve the bidding process and adopt the tariff. It is 
submitted that this is in tune with the judgment of this Court in the case 
of Energy Watchdog v. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
and others,15 wherein this Court has held that in a situation when 
there are no guidelines, then the general regulatory powers under 
Section 79(1)(b) can be exercised by the Commission. It is, therefore, 
submitted that by the same analogy the State Commission can exercise 
such powers in view of Section 86(1)(b) of the Act. 
9.	
The learned Senior Counsel submits that the APTEL has failed to take 
into consideration the larger issue of public interest. It is submitted 
that WTE project was necessary for processing the unprocessed 
municipal solid waste which is increasing day by day. 
10.	 It is further submitted that the DERC vide its order dated 6th March 
2023 had held that the Appellant-MCD under Rule 15(v) of the 
SWM Rules 2016 was performing its statutory functions to conduct 
the bidding process for the Project and that there is no bar in the 
National Tariff Policy that WTE project cannot be set up under Section 
63 of the Act. It is submitted that on an earlier occasion also the 
DERC has approved the bidding process with regard to Tehkhand 
WTE at Okhla which is under operation and supplying electricity to 
all Delhi Discoms. 
11.	 Mr. Basava Prabhu Patil, learned Senior Counsel appearing for 
the Respondent No.1, on the contrary, submits that the APTEL has 
15	
[2017] 3 SCR 153 : (2017) 14 SCC 80
248
rightly held that the Appellant-MCD was not entitled to make an 
application for adoption of tariff under Section 63 of the Act. It is 
submitted that the APTEL rightly held that it is only the Discoms or 
generating companies who are entitled to invoke the provisions of 
Section 63 of the Act. The learned Senior Counsel submits that in 
view of Rule 6.4(2) of the National Tariff Policy, 2016, it is exclusively 
for the Ministry of Power to provide a mechanism for adoption of tariff 
for WTE projects. It is, therefore, submitted that the DERC has no 
jurisdiction to entertain the application filed by the present Appellant-
MCD. He, therefore, prays for the dismissal of the present appeals. 
12.	 The limited question that falls for consideration in the present appeals 
is that, whether the application under Section 63 of the Act could 
have been made by the present Appellant-MCD which is a “local 
authority” within the meaning of Section 2(41) of the Act. 
13.	 For appreciating the rival controversy, it will be necessary to consider 
the nature of the Project which the Appellant-MCD was implementing. 
For the said purpose, it will be relevant to refer to clauses (q) and (v) 
of Rule 15 of the SWM Rules 2016, which read thus:
“15. Duties and responsibilities of local authorities 
and village panchayats of census towns and urban 
agglomerations.—The local authorities and Panchayats 
shall—
***
(q) transport segregated bio-degradable waste to the 
processing facilities like compost plant, biomethanation 
plant or any such facility. Preference shall be given for 
on site processing of such waste;
***
(v) facilitate construction, operation and maintenance 
of solid waste processing facilities and associated 
infrastructure on their own or with private sector participation 
or through any agency for optimum utilisation or various 
components of solid waste adopting suitable technology 
including the following technologies and adhering to the 
guidelines issued by the Ministry of Urban Development 
from time to time and standards prescribed by the Central 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
249
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
Pollution Control Board. Preference shall be given to 
decentralised processing to minimise transportation cost 
and environmental impacts such as—
(a) bio-methanation, microbial composting, vermi-
composting, anaerobic digestion or any other appropriate 
processing for bio-stabilisation of biodegradable waste;
(b) waste to energy processes including refused derived 
fuel for combustible fraction of waste or supply as feedstock 
to solid waste based power plants or cement kilns;”
14.	 It could thus be seen that the SWM Rules 2016 require that, while 
making provisions for solid waste disposal, the authorities shall give 
a preference to decentralized processing to minimize transportation 
cost and environmental impacts such as, waste to energy processes 
including refused derived fuel for combustible fraction of waste or 
supply as feedstock to solid waste based power plants or cement 
kilns.
15.	 It is further to be noted that the “Tariff Policy” notified by the Ministry 
of Power on 28th January 2016 is in compliance with the mandate 
of Section 3 of the Act. It could further be seen that under the said 
“Tariff Policy”, a provision has been made for renewable sources of 
energy generation including Co-generation from renewable energy 
sources. It will be relevant to refer to Rule 6.4 of the said “Tariff 
Policy”, which reads thus:
“6.4 Renewable sources of energy generation including 
Co-generation from renewable energy sources:
(1)	 Pursuant to provisions of section 86(1)(e) of the Act, 
the Appropriate Commission shall fix a minimum 
percentage of the total consumption of electricity in 
the area of a distribution licensee for purchase of 
energy from renewable energy sources, taking into 
account availability of such resources and its impact 
on retail tariffs. Cost of purchase of renewable energy 
shall be taken into account while determining tariff by 
SERCs. Long term growth trajectory of Renewable 
Purchase Obligations (RPOs) will be prescribed by 
the Ministry of Power in consultation with MNRE.
250
Provided that cogeneration from sources other than 
renewable sources shall not be excluded from the 
applicability of RPOs.
(i)	
Within the percentage so made applicable, 
to start with, the SERCs shall also reserve 
a minimum percentage for purchase of solar 
energy from the date of notification of this policy 
which shall be such that it reaches 8% of total 
consumption of energy, excluding Hydro Power, 
by March 2022 or as notified by the Central 
Government from time to time.
(ii)	
Distribution Licensee(s) shall compulsorily 
procure 100% power produced from all the 
Waste-to-Energy plants in the State, in the ratio 
of their procurement of power from all sources 
including their own, at the tariff determined by 
the Appropriate Commission under Section 62 
of the Act.
(iii)	 It is desirable that purchase of energy from 
renewable sources of energy takes place more 
or less in the same proportion in different States. 
To achieve this objective in the current scenario 
of large availability of such resources only in 
certain parts of the country, an appropriate 
mechanism such as Renewable Energy 
Certificate (REC) would need to be promoted. 
Through such a mechanism, the renewable 
energy based generation companies can sell 
the electricity to local distribution licensee at the 
rates for conventional power and can recover 
the balance cost by selling certificates to other 
distribution companies and obligated entities 
enabling the latter to meet their renewable power 
purchase obligations. The REC mechanism 
should also have a solar specific REC.
(iv)	 Appropriate Commission may also provide for a 
suitable regulatory framework for encouraging 
such other emerging renewable energy 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
251
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
technologies by prescribing separate technology 
based REC multiplier (i.e. granting higher 
or lower number of RECs to such emerging 
technologies for the same level of generation). 
Similarly, considering the change in prices of 
renewable energy technologies with passage 
of time, the Appropriate Commission may 
prescribe vintage based REC multiplier (i.e. 
granting higher or lower number of RECs for 
the same level of generation based on year of 
commissioning of plant).
(2)	 States shall endeavor to procure power from 
renewable energy sources through competitive 
bidding to keep the tariff low, except from the waste to 
energy plants. Procurement of power by Distribution 
Licensee from renewable energy sources from 
projects above the notified capacity, shall be done 
through competitive bidding process, from the date 
to be notified by the Central Government. 
16.	 It can thus be seen that clause (1) of Rule 6.4 provides that the 
Appropriate Commission shall fix a minimum percentage of the 
total consumption of electricity in the area of a distribution licensee 
for purchase of energy from renewable energy sources, taking into 
account availability of such resources and its impact on retail tariffs. It 
further provides that the cost of purchase of renewable energy shall 
be taken into account while determining tariff by SERCs and that 
the long-term growth trajectory of Renewable Purchase Obligations 
(RPOs) will be prescribed by the Ministry of Power in consultation 
with Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE). 
17.	 Certain exceptions have been made to the applicability of the said 
clause. One of the exceptions is that, the Distribution Licensee(s) 
shall compulsorily procure 100% of the power produced from all the 
Waste-to-Energy plants in the State, in the ratio of their procurement 
of power from all sources including their own, at the tariff determined 
by the Appropriate Commission under Section 62 of the Act.
18.	 It is further to be noted that the following provision has been made 
in SWM Rules 2016:
252
“9. Duties of the Ministry of Power.- The Ministry of 
Power through appropriate mechanisms shall,-
(a) decide tariff or charges for the power generated from 
the waste to energy plants based on solid waste.
(b) compulsory purchase power generated from such waste 
to energy plants by distribution company.”
19.	 It could thus be seen that under the SWM Rules 2016, a duty is cast 
upon the Ministry of Power to decide tariff or charges for the power 
generated from the waste to energy plants based on solid waste 
and compulsory purchase of power generated from such waste to 
energy plants by distribution company. 
20.	 Thus, it is to be noted that the Project, for which bids were invited by 
the Appellant-MCD, was proposed to be set up by the Appellant-MCD 
in pursuance of its statutory obligations under the SWM Rule 2016. 
21.	 A perusal of the record would reveal that the Appellant-MCD issued 
NIT for the competitive tariff bidding process for setting up of the 
Project for procurement of power by Discoms in the NCT of Delhi 
as part of Discom’s Renewal Purchase Obligation.16 The said project 
was on Design, Build, Finance, and Operate basis and was to be 
transferred back to the Appellant-MCD after 25 years. 
22.	 It is further to be noted that after the bid was conducted in consonance 
with the decision taken in the meeting dated 14th May 2022, wherein 
the Discoms authorized the Appellant-MCD to proceed with the same, 
on 3rd August 2022, the bidding documents were sent to the DERC 
for its consideration. Based on the same, the DERC vide letter dated 
24th August 2022 directed the Appellant-MCD to file a Petition for 
adoption of tariff. The DERC, further informed the Appellant-MCD 
about similar petitions filed by East Delhi Processing Limited seeking 
similar approvals. 
23.	 After M/s JITF Urban Infrastructure Ltd. emerged as a L-1 bidder 
at the levelized tariff of Rs.7.380/KWh, the Appellant-MCD filed a 
Petition No. 72 of 2022 before the DERC for adoption of tariff and 
approving the draft PPA. The DERC vide its order dated 7th March 
2022 adopted the tariff of Rs.7.380/KWh and directed the Discoms 
and the successful bidder to renegotiate the terms of the PPA. 
16	
“RPO” for short
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
253
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
24.	 Insofar as the petition of the WTERT is concerned, the DERC 
specifically rejected the contention of the WTERT to the effect that 
since the Appellant-MCD was not an authorized distribution licensee, 
it cannot float the impugned tender. It was further sought to be 
argued that the Bidding procurement under Section 63 of the Act 
was impermissible in case of ‘waste to energy’ power.
25.	 The DERC relying on the provisions of Rule 15 of the SWM Rules 
2016 specifically rejected the said contention and held that the 
Appellant-MCD was performing its statutory obligations.
26.	 While allowing the applications filed by the Respondent No. 1, the 
APTEL interpreted Section 63 of the Act and held that since the 
Appellant-MCD was neither a distribution licensee nor a generating 
company, it had no jurisdiction to file an application under Section 63 
of the Act for adoption of tariff. 
27.	 For appreciating the correctness of the findings of the APTEL, it 
will be apposite to refer to Section 63 of the Act, which reads thus:
“63. Determination of tariff by bidding process.- 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 62, the 
Appropriate Commission shall adopt the tariff if such 
tariff has been determined through transparent process 
of bidding in accordance with the guidelines issued by the 
Central Government.”
28.	 It could thus be seen that under Section 63 of the Act, the Appropriate 
Commission is entitled to adopt the tariff if such tariff has been 
determined through a transparent process of bidding in accordance 
with the guidelines issued by the Central Government. 
29.	 It could be seen that a plain reading of Section 63 of the Act would 
reveal that it does not restrict invoking of the provisions of Section 63 
only to Discoms or generating companies. 
30.	 It is a settled principle of law that the first and foremost principle of 
interpretation is that of literal interpretation. When the statute read 
in a literal manner is capable of giving meaning to the provision that 
the legislation intended to and does not lead to any absurdity, it is 
not permissible by judicial interpretation to add, alter, or delete any 
words to such a statute. Reliance in this respect could be placed 
on the judgment of this Court in the case of Punjab State Power 
254
Corporation Limited and another vs. Emta Coal Limited17 wherein 
this Court has observed thus:
“23. The principle of giving a plain and literal meaning to 
the words in a statute is well-recognised for ages. Though 
there are a number of judgments, we may gainfully refer 
to the judgment of this Court delivered by Das, J. as early 
as 1955 in Jugalkishore Saraf v. Raw Cotton Co. Ltd. 
[Jugalkishore Saraf v. Raw Cotton Co. Ltd. (1955) 1 SCR 
1369 : AIR 1955 SC 376] : (AIR p. 381, para 6)
“6. … The cardinal rule of construction of 
statutes is to read the statute literally, that is 
by giving to the words used by the legislature 
their ordinary, natural and grammatical meaning. 
If, however, such a reading leads to absurdity 
and the words are susceptible of another 
meaning the Court may adopt the same. But 
if no such alternative construction is possible, 
the Court must adopt the ordinary rule of literal 
interpretation.”
24. Though there are various authorities on the said 
subject, we do not wish to burden the present judgment 
by reproducing those. In our considered view, if the words 
used in Section 11 of the said Act are construed in plain 
and literal term, they do not lead to an absurdity and as 
such, the rule of plain and literal interpretation will have 
to be followed. We find that in case the interpretation as 
sought to be placed by Shri Rohatgi is to be accepted, it will 
do complete violence to the language of Section 11 of the 
said Act. If it is held that under Section 11 of the said Act, 
a prior contractor is entitled to continue if his performance 
is found to be satisfactory and if there is nothing against 
him, then it will be providing something in Section 11 of 
the said Act which the statute has not provided for. It will 
also lead to making the words “may elect, to adopt and 
continue” redundant and otiose.
17	
[2021] 11 SCR 772 : (2022) 2 SCC 1
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
255
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
25. It is a settled principle of law that when, upon a plain 
and literal interpretation of the words used in a statute, the 
legislative intent could be gathered, it is not permissible to 
add words to the statute. Equally, such an interpretation 
which would make some terms used in a statute otiose 
or meaningless, has to be avoided. We therefore find 
that if an interpretation as sought to be placed by EMTA 
is to be accepted, the same would be wholly contrary to 
the principle of literal interpretation. There are number of 
authorities in support of the said proposition. However, 
we refrain from referring to them in view of the following 
observations made by this Court in a recent judgment in 
Ajit Mohan v. Delhi Legislative Assembly [Ajit Mohan v. 
Delhi Legislative Assembly (2022) 3 SCC 529 : 2021 SCC 
OnLine SC 456] : (SCC para 240)
“240. … In our view if the proposition of law 
is not doubted by the Court, it does not need 
a precedent unless asked for. If a question is 
raised about a legal proposition, the judgment 
must be relatable to that proposition — and not 
multiple judgments.”
As such, the contention in that regard is found to be 
without merit.”
31.	 Upon a plain reading of Section 63 of the Act, it would reveal that the 
power of the Appropriate Commission thereunder is, notwithstanding 
anything contained in Section 62. 
32.	 It can thus be seen that the intention of the legislature is to empower 
the Appropriate Commission to adopt the tariff if such tariff has been 
determined through a transparent process of bidding in accordance 
with the guidelines issued by the Central Government. 
33.	 The legislative purpose appears to be that when the power is 
being produced through a process of bidding it has to be done in 
a transparent manner. Another requirement is that the same must 
be done in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central 
Government.
34.	 This Court in the case of Energy Watchdog (supra) has held that 
when there are no guidelines, then the Central Commission can 
256
exercise power under Section 79(1)(b) of the Act. The provisions 
of Section 86(1)(b) of the Act are analogous with Section 79(1)(b) 
of the said Act. 
35.	 A plain reading of Section 63 of the Act would not show that the 
legislature intended to restrict the invocation of the jurisdiction of the 
State Commission only by the Discoms or generating companies. In 
our view, the interpretation as placed by the APTEL is adding words 
in the provisions of Section 63 of the Act which the legislature did 
not intend to. 
36.	 As already stated herein above, when a provision in the statute upon 
its plain reading is capable of giving a meaning to it as intended 
by the legislature, then it will not be permissible for the courts to 
add, alter, or delete the words to the said provision. In any case, 
upon a plain reading of the provisions of Section 63 of the Act, the 
meaning which we gather does not result in any absurdity. In such 
a situation, addition of words in the statute by judicial interpretation 
is wholly impermissible. 
37.	 Apart from that, we are of the view that APTEL could not have read 
the provisions of Section 63 of the Act in isolation. The provisions 
of Section 63 will have to be read in harmony with the provisions of 
Section 86(1)(b) of the Act, which reads thus:
“86. Functions of the State Commission.-(1) The State 
Commission shall discharge the following functions, 
namely:-
(a)	 ……………………………………………
(b)	 regulate electricity purchase and procurement 
process of distribution licensees including the price at 
which electricity shall be procured from the generating 
companies or licensees or from other sources through 
agreements for purchase of power for distribution and 
supply within the State;” 
38.	 A perusal of the provision of Section 86(1)(b) of the Act would reveal 
that a duty is cast upon the State Commission to regulate electricity 
purchase and procurement process of distribution licensees including 
the price at which electricity shall be procured from the generating 
companies or licensees or from other sources through agreements 
for purchase of power for distribution and supply within the State. 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
257
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
39.	 It could thus be seen that the duty cast upon the State Commission 
is to regulate: 
(i)	
the electricity purchase and procurement process of distribution 
licensees;
(ii)	
the price at which electricity shall be procured from the 
generating companies or licensees, or; 
(iii)	 from other sources through agreements for purchase of power 
for distribution and supply within the State.
40.	 The legislative intent behind Section 86(1)(b) of the Act is to empower 
the State Commission to regulate all matters regarding the electricity 
purchase and procurement processes. 
41.	 As held by this Court in the case of Jaipur Vidyut Vitran Nigam 
Limited and others v. MB Power (Madhya Pradesh) Limited 
and others,18 the State Commission is not a mere post office, but 
a duty is cast upon it to balance the interests of consumers on one 
hand and that of generators or Discoms on the other hand. If the 
provisions of Section 63 of the Act are read in harmony with the 
provisions of Section 86(1)(b) of the Act, the legislative intent that 
could be gathered is that the State Commission while exercising its 
powers under Section 63 of the Act shall adopt the tariff when it has 
been determined in the bidding process. However, while adopting 
the same it will have to be satisfied that the same is done in a 
transparent manner. It will also have to be examined as to whether 
the interests of the generators/Discoms on one hand are balanced 
with the interests of the consumers. 
42.	 In our view, reading the Section 63 of the Act in the manner in which 
it has been interpreted by the APTEL, would impose unnecessary 
restrictions on the powers and duties of the State Commission under 
Section 86(1)(b) of the Act, which are of a very wide amplitude. 
43.	 In this respect, we may refer to the judgment of this Court in the 
case of Sanjay Ramdas Patil v. Sanjay and others19 wherein 
this Court after referring to the earlier judgments of this Court has 
observed thus:
18	
[2024] 1 SCR 909 : (2024) 8 SCC 513
19	
[2021] 11 SCR 640 : (2021) 10 SCC 306
258
“25. In Balasinor Nagrik Coop. Bank Ltd. v. Babubhai 
Shankerlal Pandya [Balasinor Nagrik Coop. Bank Ltd v. 
Babubhai Shankerlal Pandya (1987) 1 SCC 606], this 
Court observed thus : (SCC p. 608, para 4)
“4. … It is an elementary rule that construction 
of a section is to be made of all parts together. 
It is not permissible to omit any part of it. For, 
the principle that the statute must be read as a 
whole is equally applicable to different parts of 
the same section.”
26. Again in Mohan Kumar Singhania v. Union of India 
[Mohan Kumar Singhania v. Union of India, 1992 Supp 
(1) SCC 594 : 1992 SCC (L&S) 455], this Court observed 
thus : (SCC p. 624, para 67)
“67. We think, it is not necessary to proliferate 
this judgment by citing all the judgments and 
extracting the textual passages from the various 
textbooks on the principles of Interpretation of 
Statutes. However, it will suffice to say that 
while interpreting a statute the consideration 
of inconvenience and hardships should be 
avoided and that when the language is clear 
and explicit and the words used are plain 
and unambiguous, we are bound to construe 
them in their ordinary sense with reference to 
other clauses of the Act or the Rules as the 
case may be, so far as possible, to make a 
consistent enactment of the whole statute or 
series of statutes/rules/regulations relating to 
the subject-matter. Added to this, in construing a 
statute, the Court has to ascertain the intention 
of the law-making authority in the backdrop 
of the dominant purpose and the underlying 
intendment of the said statute and that every 
statute is to be interpreted without any violence 
to its language and applied as far as its explicit 
language admits consistent with the established 
rule of interpretation.”
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
259
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
27. In Sultana Begum v. Prem Chand Jain [Sultana Begum 
v. Prem Chand Jain (1997) 1 SCC 373], this Court observed 
thus : (SCC pp. 381-82, para 15)
“15. On a conspectus of the case-law indicated 
above, the following principles are clearly 
discernible:
(1) It is the duty of the courts to avoid a head-
on clash between two sections of the Act and 
to construe the provisions which appear to be 
in conflict with each other in such a manner as 
to harmonise them.
(2) The provisions of one section of a statute 
cannot be used to defeat the other provisions 
unless the court, in spite of its efforts, finds it 
impossible to effect reconciliation between them.
(3) It has to be borne in mind by all the courts 
all the time that when there are two conflicting 
provisions in an Act, which cannot be reconciled 
with each other, they should be so interpreted 
that, if possible, effect should be given to both. 
This is the essence of the rule of “harmonious 
construction”.
(4) The courts have also to keep in mind that 
an interpretation which reduces one of the 
provisions as a “dead letter” or “useless lumber” 
is not harmonious construction.
(5) To harmonise is not to destroy any statutory 
provision or to render it otiose.”
(emphasis in original)
28. In Jagdish Singh v. Lt. Governor [Jagdish Singh v. Lt. 
Governor (1997) 4 SCC 435], this Court observed thus : 
(SCC p. 441, para 7)
“7. … It is a cardinal principle of construction of 
a statute or the statutory rule that efforts should 
be made in construing the different provisions, so 
260
that, each provision will have its play and in the 
event of any conflict a harmonious construction 
should be given. Further a statute or a rule 
made thereunder should be read as a whole 
and one provision should be construed with 
reference to the other provision so as to make 
the rule consistent and any construction which 
would bring any inconsistency or repugnancy 
between one provision and the other should 
be avoided. One rule cannot be used to defeat 
another rule in the same rules unless it is 
impossible to effect harmonisation between 
them. The well-known principle of harmonious 
construction is that effect should be given to 
all the provisions, and therefore, this Court has 
held in several cases that a construction that 
reduces one of the provisions to a “dead letter” 
is not a harmonious construction as one part is 
being destroyed and consequently court should 
avoid such a construction.”
29. In CIT v. Hindustan Bulk Carriers [CIT v. Hindustan 
Bulk Carriers (2003) 3 SCC 57] , this Court observed thus : 
(SCC pp. 73-74, paras 16-21)
“16. The courts will have to reject that 
construction which will defeat the plain intention 
of the legislature even though there may be 
some inexactitude in the language used. (See 
Salmon v. Duncombe [Salmon v. Duncombe, 
(1886) LR 11 AC 627 (PC) : 55 LJPC 69 : 55 
LT 446] , AC at. 634, Curtis v. Stovin [Curtis v. 
Stovin, (1889) LR 22 QBD 513 (CA) : 58 LJQB 
174 : 60 LT 772] referred to in S. Teja Singh 
case [CIT v. S. Teja Singh, AIR 1959 SC 352 : 
(1959) 35 ITR 408] .)
17. If the choice is between two interpretations, 
the narrower of which would fail to achieve the 
manifest purpose of the legislation, we should 
avoid a construction which would reduce the 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
261
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
legislation to futility, and should rather accept 
the bolder construction, based on the view that 
Parliament would legislate only for the purpose 
of bringing about an effective result. (See Nokes 
v. Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries Ltd. [Nokes 
v. Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries Ltd., 1940 
AC 1014 : (1940) 3 All ER 549 (HL) : 109 LJKB 
865 : 163 LT 343] referred to in Pye v. Minister 
for Lands for New South Wales [Pye v. Minister 
for Lands for New South Wales, (1954) 1 WLR 
1410 : (1954) 3 All ER 514 (PC)] .) The principles 
indicated in the said cases were reiterated by 
this Court in Mohan Kumar Singhania v. Union 
of India [Mohan Kumar Singhania v. Union of 
India 1992 Supp (1) SCC 594 : 1992 SCC 
(L&S) 455] .
18. The statute must be read as a whole and 
one provision of the Act should be construed 
with reference to other provisions in the same 
Act so as to make a consistent enactment of 
the whole statute.
19. The court must ascertain the intention of 
the legislature by directing its attention not 
merely to the clauses to be construed but to 
the entire statute; it must compare the clause 
with other parts of the law and the setting in 
which the clause to be interpreted occurs. 
(See R.S. Raghunath v. State of Karnataka 
[R.S. Raghunath v. State of Karnataka (1992) 
1 SCC 335 : 1992 SCC (L&S) 286] .) Such 
a construction has the merit of avoiding any 
inconsistency or repugnancy either within a 
section or between two different sections or 
provisions of the same statute. It is the duty of 
the court to avoid a head-on clash between two 
sections of the same Act. (See Sultana Begum 
v. Prem Chand Jain [Sultana Begum v. Prem 
Chand Jain (1997) 1 SCC 373] .)
262
20. Whenever it is possible to do so, it must be 
done to construe the provisions which appear 
to conflict so that they harmonise. It should not 
be lightly assumed that Parliament had given 
with one hand what it took away with the other.
21. The provisions of one section of the statute 
cannot be used to defeat those of another unless 
it is impossible to effect reconciliation between 
them. Thus a construction that reduces one of 
the provisions to a “useless lumber” or “dead 
letter” is not a harmonised construction. To 
harmonise is not to destroy.”
30. It could thus be seen that it is more than well settled 
that it is the duty of the Court to construe the statute 
as a whole and that one provision of the Act has to be 
construed with reference to other provisions so as to 
make a consistent enactment of the whole statute. It is 
the duty of the Court to avoid a head-on clash between 
two sections and construe the provisions which appear 
to be in conflict with each other in such a manner so as 
to harmonise them. It is further equally settled that while 
interpreting a particular statutory provision, it should not 
result into making the other provision a “useless lumber” 
or a “dead letter”. While construing the provisions, the 
Court will have to ascertain the intention of the law-making 
authority in the backdrop of dominant purpose and the 
underlying intendment of the statute.”
44.	 We are, therefore, of the considered view that when the provisions 
of Section 63 of the Act are read in harmony with the provisions of 
Section 86(1)(b) of the Act, the powers of the State Commission 
cannot be curtailed by interpreting that the same can be invoked 
only by the Discoms or the generating companies. 
45.	 It will further be relevant to refer to the provisions of Section 174 
and 175 of the Act, which read thus:
“174. Act to have overriding effect.- Save as otherwise 
provided in section 173, the provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
263
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other 
than this Act. 
175. Provisions of this Act to be in addition to and not 
in derogation of other laws.- The provisions of this Act 
are in addition to and not in derogation of any other law 
for the time being in force.”
46.	 A perusal of Section 174 of the Act would reveal that, save as 
otherwise provided in Section 173, the provisions of the Act shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in 
any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law other than the Act.
47.	 Section 175 of the Act provides that the provisions of the said Act 
are in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time 
being in force. 
48.	 In our view, there is no inconsistency between the provisions of 
Section 63 of the Act and Rule 15 of the SWM Rules 2016. The 
provisions of Rule 15 of the SWM Rules 2016, which are enacted 
under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, mandate the appellant 
to undertake WTE project(s). 
49.	 It can thus be seen that insofar as the WTE projects are concerned, 
the provisions under the Act will have to be read in addition to 
the provisions under Rule 15 of the SWM Rules 2016 and not in 
derogation thereof. 
50.	 Apart from that, Rule 6.4 of the Tariff Policy, which is notified in 
compliance with the mandate of Section 63 of the Act, the distribution 
licensees are mandated to compulsorily procure 100% of the power 
produced from all the WTE plants in the State in the ratio of their 
procurement of power from all sources including their own. Not 
only that, the Appropriate Commission is also required to provide 
suitable regulatory framework for encouraging such other emerging 
renewable energy technologies. 
51.	 It will also be relevant to refer to the provisions of Section 86(1)(e) 
of the Act, which read thus:
“86. Functions of the State Commission.-(1) The State 
Commission shall discharge the following functions, 
namely:-
264
(a)	 ……………………………………………
(e)	 promote cogeneration and generation of electricity 
from renewable sources of energy by providing 
suitable measures for connectivity with the grid and 
sale of electricity from such sources, a percentage 
of the total consumption of electricity in the area of 
a distribution licensee;”
52.	 It can thus be seen that the provisions of Section 86(1)(e) of the 
Act read with Rule 6.4 of the Tariff Policy provide for promoting 
cogeneration and generation of electricity from renewable sources 
of energy by providing suitable measures for connectivity with the 
grid and sale of electricity from such sources, a percentage of the 
total consumption of electricity in the area of a distribution licensee.
53.	 We are of the considered view that the APTEL has failed to take 
into consideration all these aspects of the matters. 
54.	 In any case, the APTEL has grossly erred in treating the present 
Appellant-MCD as a total stranger. The WTE project was on Design, 
Build, Finance and Operate basis. The ownership of the said Project 
was always to be with the Appellant-MCD and the operation of the 
facility is required to be transferred back to the Appellant-MCD after 
25 years. The reasoning given by the APTEL, that if the application 
of the Appellant-MCD for adoption of tariff was held to be tenable, 
then it would amount to permitting any stranger to apply under 
Section 63 of the Act, is factually not correct. The APTEL failed to 
take into consideration that the Appellant-MCD was establishing the 
said Project in order to perform its statutory obligations. The plain 
reading of Section 63 of the Act would reveal that the Appropriate 
Commission has to adopt the tariff only after being satisfied that such 
a tariff has been determined through a transparent process of bidding 
in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central Government. 
55.	 The DERC, after taking into consideration all the relevant factors, 
had granted its approval to the tariff with certain conditions. The 
relevant factors which were taken into consideration by the DERC 
while granting the approval were:
(i)	
the mandate of Rule 15 of the SWM Rules 2016;
(ii)	
the financial evaluation report which was sent by the Bidding 
Evaluation Committee;
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
265
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gagan Narang & Ors. Etc
(iii)	 the certificate on the conformity that the bidding process had 
been completed by following the transparent process; and 
(iv)	 that there was a mandate under the NTP to the effect that the 
entire power generated by the WTE project was to be procured 
by the Discoms. 
However, the same has been upset by the APTEL only on a hyper-
technical ground. 
56.	 The APTEL also failed to take into consideration that the WTE project 
in question was in the larger public interest thereby providing for 
disposal of the huge quantity of waste generated in the city of Delhi. 
57.	 Since we are inclined to allow the appeals of the appellant on the 
aforesaid grounds, we do not find it necessary to go into the contention 
of the appellant with regard to locus of the Respondent No.1 in filing 
the appeals before the APTEL.
58.	 In the result, we pass the following order:
(i)	
the appeals are allowed;
(ii)	
the Impugned common final judgment and order of the Appellate 
Tribunal for Electricity at New Delhi dated 31st August 2023 
passed in DFR No. 245 of 2023 and DFR No. 247 of 2023 is 
quashed and set aside; 
(iii)	 the orders of the Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission dated 
6th March 2023 in Petition No. 65 of 2022 and 7th March 2023 
in Petition No. 72 of 2022 are affirmed.
59.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey