[2025] 4 S.C.R. 336 : 2025 INSC 435
Maukam Singh & Others 
v. 
State of Madhya Pradesh
(Criminal Appeal No. 1741 of 2025)
02 April 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia and K. Vinod Chandran,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the order passed by the High Court upholding the 
conviction and sentence imposed on the accused u/s.302/34 and 
ss.323 and 324 rw s.34 IPC justified.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.302, 323, 324, 34 – Murder – Ocular 
evidence – Animosity between the accused and the victims 
regarding the ownership of the place of worship – Accused 
persons-appellants armed with deadly weapons came to the 
house of the victim-grandfather, questioned them resulting 
in a scuffle which lead to the death of the victim and injuries 
to grandchildren – Appellants convicted u/ss.302/34, 323 
and 324 rw s.34 for homicide and for injuries sustained by 
grandchildren and sentenced accordingly – High Court upheld 
the same – Interference with: 
Held: Not called for – Merely because witnesses are related, they 
cannot be termed to be interested – Ocular witnesses were all 
grandchildren of the deceased which would not result in eschewing 
their testimony – All the ocular witnesses were injured which makes 
their testimony credible and believable – Also nothing suspicious 
to doubt the veracity of the ocular witnesses – Furthermore, the 
facts regarding the fight and the overt acts does not make it an 
offence covered u/s.304 Part II nor fall under any of the Exceptions 
to s.300 resulting in a finding of culpable homicide not amounting 
to murder – Medical evidence that the injury could be caused 
either manually by a hard and blunt object or by an accidental fall, 
does not detract from the finding u/s.302, especially considering 
the ocular testimony – Intention is clear from the deadly nature of 
* Author
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
337
Maukam Singh & Others v. State of Madhya Pradesh
the weapons carried by the accused, who were the aggressors, 
who trespassed into the house of the victims and wielded such 
weapons in a manner causing grievous injuries to the victims, one 
of whom died – Evidence. [Paras 5, 6, 13, 14]
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Ocular evidence; Interested witness; Motive of enmity is double 
edged weapon; Relationship between witnesses and deceased; 
Reverse hit by axe; Medical evidence; Deadly nature of weapons; 
Injured witnesses; Ocular testimony; Intention; Aggressors; 
Grievous injuries.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1741 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 17.01.2018 of the High Court 
of Madhya Pradesh at Gwalior in CRLA No. 155 of 2000
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellants:
Vikrant Singh Bais, Ms. Neema, Yogesh Tiwari.
Advs. for the Respondent:
D. S. Parmar, A.A.G., Abhimanyu Singh Ga, Yashraj Singh Bundela, 
Surjeet Singh, Chanakya Baruah, Ms. Saloni, Rohan Singla.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K. Vinod Chandran, J.
Leave granted.	
2.	
Annoyed by the worship of a deity installed in a disputed land, 
carried out by one of the injured; the accused, on the instigation of 
the person who was is possession of the land, reached the house 
338
of the deceased with weapons and questioned them resulting in a 
scuffle ending with the death of the grandfather and injuries to the 
three grandchildren; as per the story of the prosecution. Nine accused 
were arrayed in the FIR but only six, against whom charge was laid 
by the Trial Court of which one died during the proceedings. Three, 
the appellants herein were charged with offences under Sections 
302, 323 & 324 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code1. Two 
were charged under Sections 324, 341 & 506 read with Section 34; 
who were acquitted by the Trial Court. The three appellants herein 
were convicted under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the IPC, 
for the homicide and sentenced to life imprisonment and fine of 
Rs.1,000/- each. They were also convicted under Sections 323 & 
324 read with Section 34 of IPC, for the injuries sustained by the 
grandchildren of the deceased, imposing a sentence of 6 months and 
1 year respectively. The High Court confirmed the findings of the Trial 
Court leading to the conviction and affirmed the sentence imposed.
3.	
On appeal before this Court, learned counsel appearing for the 
appellants Sh. Vikrant Singh Bais argued that there was no 
premeditation and no intention to cause death; not even the remotest 
knowledge of an injury being caused which was likely to cause death. 
In fact, the deposition of ocular witnesses indicate that the accused 
carried cutting weapons. However, the injury on the deceased, even 
according to the Doctor who examined him at the first instance 
indicates that there were no incised injuries. It was also stated that 
the injury which resulted in death, could have been caused by an 
accidental fall. In the totality of the circumstances it is clear that if at 
all the accused are found guilty of the alleged crime, they can only 
be convicted under Part II of Section 304.
4.	
Sh. Yashraj Singh Bundela, learned counsel appearing for the 
respondent-State pointed out that the injured witnesses (eye-
witnesses), have spoken in tandem and it was the accused who 
trespassed into the house of the victims; including the deceased, 
and attacked them. There was absolutely no provocation on the part 
of the victims and it was with premeditation and intention to cause 
death that the accused came to the house of the deceased, armed 
with deadly weapons. The fact that the deceased died after 25 days 
1	
For brevity ‘IPC’
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
339
Maukam Singh & Others v. State of Madhya Pradesh
in a hospital, would not result in a different finding than that of murder, 
since the single blow caused to the head of the deceased led to the 
death. There is absolutely no reason to interfere with the conviction 
for the offences, which charges are found to have been proved nor 
is there any reason to alter the sentence imposed.
5.	
We have gone through the entire records and depositions of the 
witnesses. At the outset, we have to notice that the ocular witnesses 
were all grandchildren of the deceased; which by itself would not 
result in eschewing their testimony. It is trite that, merely because 
witnesses are related, they cannot be termed to the interested, 
especially in a case where there is ocular testimony. The prosecution 
unequivocally proved that the altercation leading to the scuffle 
occurred in the house of the deceased, wherein the accused had 
come with deadly weapons, clearly with the intention to harm the 
inmates of the house, one of whom had visited the disputed property 
to offer prayers. That the dispute existed with reference to the land 
stands proved by the testimony of PW-4, a neighbour, who had gone 
to the house of the deceased, hearing the commotion. He testified 
in cross examination that there was animosity between the accused 
and the victims regarding the ownership of the place of worship. 
6.	
The said statement regarding animosity, brought out in cross-
examination, is noticed by us, fully realising that, motive of enmity 
is a doubled edged weapon. Animosity alleged can even lead to 
an accusation of false allegation on the part of the complainant to 
deliberately implicate the accused. This makes it imminent that we 
examine the testimony of witnesses with a hawk’s eye to understand 
whether it is truthful or the witnesses are to be disbelieved. The 
relationship of the ocular witnesses with the deceased is of no 
consequence, as the possibility of outsiders being available inside 
the house of the injured is very remote. It also has to be kept in 
mind that all the ocular witnesses were injured which makes their 
testimony credible and believable
7.	
PW 1-3 are the grandchildren who, in consonance with the FIR 
registered, spoke of the accused having come to their house with 
a farsa and luhangi (an axe and a cutting weapon). The allegation 
was that the accused inflicted blows on the deceased, which injury, 
he sustained in the mouth and head. PW-1 also claimed that the 
first appellant inflicted a blow with the reverse side of the axe on 
340
his brother PW3 which hit him on the head and legs. PW1 was also 
hit on the head and hands. PW11, the Doctor who examined the 
deceased and the injured deposed that there were five injuries on 
the body of PW1: (i) incised wound on the right side of the head, (ii) 
& (iii) abrasion and incised wound on the right side of the nose, (iv) 
swelling on the right forearm and (v) contusion on left knee. This is 
in consonance with PW1’s testimony. Contradiction brought out in 
cross examination is only that there was no statement made that 
Panna Lal and Dashrath Singh, the acquitted accused, had beaten 
PW1 and his grandfather which was not stated in the Section 161 
statement.
8.	
PW2 stated that the first accused inflicted a blow with axe on his 
grandfather, the deceased and the third accused inflicted a blow 
with the cutting weapon. As for his own injuries, he claimed that 
one of the accused inflicted a blow with the cutting weapon on his 
shoulder and another hit his leg with a lathi. The medical evidence 
of PW11 with respect to PW2 indicates abrasion of the right shoulder 
and left thumb and abrasion on the left leg; in consonance with 
his deposition. PW2 also stated that the deceased was beaten 
by all the accused and the first accused inflicted a blow with the 
axe and the third accused hit him with the cutting weapon. The 
contradiction brought out clearly indicates that he had not stated 
the blow inflicted to the deceased by the first accused, in his 
Section 161 statement.
9.	
PW3 another grandson of the deceased specifically spoke of the 
first accused having inflicted a blow with the reverse side of the 
axe on the head of the deceased and the third accused also having 
inflicted a blow with the cutting weapon. As far as his own injuries, 
he claimed the first accused hit him on the head with an axe and 
the third accused hit him on the head, with a cutting weapon and 
two other accused having inflicted blows with the cutting weapon 
on his leg and on his back. PW11, the Doctor spoke of PW3 having 
sustained three injuries, (i) an incised wound above the right ear, (ii) 
abrasion on front side of right knee and (iii) abrasion on right index 
finger; which corroborates PW3’s testimony.
10.	 We have to keep in mind that that there was a scuffle which ensued 
after the accused came to the house of the deceased, with deadly 
weapons. That they carried deadly weapons have been spoken of 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
341
Maukam Singh & Others v. State of Madhya Pradesh
by all the three ocular witnesses, further corroborated by PW-4, 
a neighbour, who spoke of the accused being armed with an axe 
and a cutting weapon. The quarrel that ensued and the scuffle 
was also spoken of by PW4. The injury sustained by Than Singh; 
the deceased, as spoken of by the eye-witnesses was further 
corroborated by PW-4 who had accompanied the injured victims 
to the hospital. In cross-examination he specifically stated that 
he heard the sound of weeping of women from the neighbouring 
house and witnessed the scuffle, on reaching there. We find that 
nothing suspicious, to doubt the veracity of the ocular witnesses, 
has come out in their depositions either in the chief-examination 
or cross. 
11.	 The eye-witnesses; PW’s 1 to 3, who suffered injuries in the incident 
spoke of the blow to the head of the deceased. The learned counsel 
for the accused specifically pointed out that there was no cut injury 
on the deceased. In the teeth of the testimony of the accused having 
carried only cutting weapons; the injury sustained by the deceased 
in all probability was caused by a fall. This absolves the accused 
especially considering the testimony of the Doctor that the fatal injury 
could have been caused by a fall.
12.	 The deceased according to PW11, Doctor, suffered two injuries; 
both, on the head, one fatal and the other simple. The two injuries 
are as follows : 
(i) swelling extended from left side of his head near to 
left ear extending up to middle of the scalp and this 
swelling was also extended up to parietal region of 
the head and blood was oozing from left ear and both 
nostrils of the nose of Than Singh and for determining 
the nature of this injury he advised for x-ray examination 
of Than Singh,
ii) lacerated wound on the front and at middle part of head.
In cross examination, the Doctor deposed that the fatal injury can 
be inflicted by a hard and blunt object. It was also deposed that 
the fatal injury could be caused by an accidental fall; which in the 
context of the specific corroborated testimony of a reverse hit by the 
axe is of no consequence. When a scuffle ensues, it cannot be said 
that the witnesses; especially if they were actively involved in the 
342
scuffle and were also injured, would speak of the minute details of 
who inflicted the blow, with what weapon and precisely how it was 
inflicted. Suffice it to notice that the ocular witnesses, also injured in 
the same transaction, spoke of a blow on the head of the deceased; 
their grandfather. The mere fact that PW2 and 3 did not speak of a 
reverse hit by an axe in the Section 161 statement cannot lead to 
their testimony of the overt act being disbelieved. The embellishment 
even if ignored, the overt act stands proved.
13.	 That, the accused came to the house of the deceased with the 
intention of questioning them regarding the visit made to the deity 
installed in the disputed property, has been unequivocally proved 
by the oral testimony of witnesses. That, the accused came to the 
house armed with deadly weapons also stands established which 
clearly points to the premeditation and the intention to cause injuries 
which were likely to cause death. The facts regarding the fight and 
the overt acts, as disclosed from the evidence does not commend 
us to find an offence covered under Part II of Section 304 nor falls 
under any of the Exceptions to Section 300; resulting in a finding of 
culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The medical evidence, 
that the injury could be caused either manually by a hard and blunt 
object or by an accidental fall, does not detract from the finding 
under Section 302, especially considering the ocular testimony; 
(i) of the accused having come with deadly weapons to the house 
of the victims, (ii) the altercation and fight that ensued and (iii) the 
overt acts of the accused, inflicting injuries on various parts of the 
body of the deceased and victims, (iv) totally corroborated by the 
medical evidence regarding injuries on the deceased and each of 
the injured witnesses; PWs 1 to 3. The fatal injury caused on the 
deceased was by a blow to the head; a vital part of the body, with 
the reverse side of an axe. The intention thus is clear, from the 
deadly nature of the weapons carried by the accused, who were 
the aggressors, who trespassed into the house of the victims and 
wielded such weapons in a manner causing grievous injuries to the 
victims; one of whom died. The severity of the injury, caused by a 
blow to the head, definitely resulted in the death; though after a few 
days, as deposed by the Doctor.
14.	 We find no reason to interfere with the conviction and sentence 
imposed on the accused. The appeal stands dismissed. The 
appellants, if on bail, shall appear and surrender before the Sessions 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
343
Maukam Singh & Others v. State of Madhya Pradesh
Court, within two weeks of this order; failing which the Sessions Court 
shall take appropriate steps to apprehend them so as to undergo 
the sentence awarded.
15.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain