[2025] 1 S.C.R. 1 : 2025 INSC 8
Kim Wansoo  
v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 15 of 2025) 
02 January 2025
[C.T. Ravikumar* and Sanjay Kumar, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards invocation of extraordinary power u/Art. 
226 of the Constitution to quash criminal proceedings.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Art.226 – Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 – s.482 – Quashing of criminal proceedings – 
Invocation of extraordinary power u/Art.226 – FIR registered  
u/ss.406, 420, 323, 504, 506 and 120-B IPC against the accused, 
including the appellant-foreign national and Project Manager 
for defaulting in payment to the company – Appellant sought 
quashing of FIR – However, the High Court refused to quash 
FIR – Correctness:
Held: Normally, quashing of criminal proceedings would be 
sought and would be done in exercise of the inherent power of 
the High Court u/s. 482 – But that does not mean that it could 
not be done only in invocation of the extraordinary power u/
Art. 226 – Extraordinary power u/Art. 226 or the inherent power 
u/s. 482 could be exercised by the High Court, either to prevent 
abuse of process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends 
of justice – On facts, the High Court erred in refusing to exercise 
the extraordinary power u/Art. 226 to quash the FIR and all 
further proceedings in pursuance thereof, qua the appellant – 
Perusal of the FIR would reveal that the same did not disclose 
commission of offence as alleged without anything being added 
to the recitals thereof – Besides the vague allegations, the rest of 
them, even if taken as true, would not disclose the commission 
of any offence and make out a case against, the appellant – 
In such circumstances, asking the appellant to stand the trial 
would be nothing but an abuse of process of law and as such,  
* Author
2
non-interference by refusing to exercise the power to quash 
the FIR and further proceedings based thereon, would result in 
miscarriage of justice – Judgment passed by the High Court set 
aside – FIR and all further proceedings pursuant thereto, qua the 
appellant quashed and set aside. [Paras 6, 10, 12-14]
Case Law Cited
State of Haryana and Ors. v. Bhajan Lal and Ors. 1990 INSC 363 : 
[1990] Supp. 3 SCR 259 : AIR 1992 SC 604; Pepsi Foods Ltd. and 
Anr. v. Special Judicial Magistrate and Ors. 1997 INSC 714 : [1997] 
Supp. 5 SCR 12 : AIR 1998 SC 128; Eastern Spg. Mills v. Rajiv 
Poddar, AIR 1985 SC 1668; State of A.P. v. Golconda Linga Swamy 
2004 INSC 404 : [2004] Supp. 3 SCR 147 : (2004) 6 SCC 522; 
Mohammad Wajid and Another. v. State of U.P. and Anr., 2023 INSC 
683: [2023] 11 SCR 313 : 2023 SCC Online SC 951 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal 
Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Invocation of extraordinary power u/Art. 226; Quashing of criminal 
proceedings; Foreign national; Default in payment; Quashing of 
FIR; Inherent power of the High Court u/s. 482 CrPC; Extraordinary 
power u/Art. 226; Abuse of process; Vague allegations; Project 
Manager; Miscarriage of justice.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
15 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 26.08.2020 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in CRLMWP No. 8063 of 2020
Appearances for Parties
M. Shoeb Alam, Sr. Adv., Talha Abdul Rahman, M. Shaz Khan, 
Adnan Yousuf, Advs. for the Appellant.
Pallav Shishodia, Sr. Adv., Divyesh Pratap Singh, Rajat Singh, 
Andleeb Naqvi, Sarthak Chandra, Arun Pratap Singh Rajawat, 
Danish Zubair Khan, Dr. Lokendra Malik, Advs. for the Respondents.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
3
Kim Wansoo v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
C.T. Ravikumar, J.
1.	
Leave granted. 
2.	
This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment dated 
26.08.2020 in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No.8063 of 2020 passed 
by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, refusing to quash FIR 
No.64/2020 registered at Police Station, Sadar Bazar, District Meerut. 
Furthermore, it was ordered thereunder thus: -
“However, considering the allegations made in the FIR, 
the provisions of Section 157, Cr. P.C. and the view taken 
by the Apex Court in the case of Joginder Kumar v. 
State of U.P. 1994, Cr.L.J. 1981, it is directed that the 
petitioner shall not be arrested in the above case, till the 
credible evidence is not available against him during the 
investigation or till the submission of Police Report under 
Section 173(2), Cr. P.C., whichever is earlier.” 
3.	
On 14.10.2020, this Court issued notice and also stayed further 
proceedings based on the subject FIR. The said order is still in force. 
4.	
The facts leading to the impugned judgment read as under: -
Hyundai Motor India Limited (for brevity, ‘HMIL’ only) awarded a 
contract for construction and development of a project work namely, 
Gurgaon, HMI Project, R.C. Works (hereafter referred to as, ‘the 
project’) to Hyundai Engineering & Construction India LLP (for short, 
‘HEC India LLP’). Agreement dated 20.10.2017 was executed therefor, 
between the said companies and the appellant herein was the Project 
Manager of HEC India LLP. He is a foreign national. HEC India 
LLP, sub-contracted the work to KOTEC Automotive Services India 
Private Limited (for short, ‘KOTEC’) which in turn sub-contracted the 
RC constructions work to M/s. YSSS India Construction (for short, 
‘YSSS’) and ‘YSSS’ further sub-contracted with M/s R.T. Construction, 
which is the complainant’s (respondent No.4 herein) entity, to obtain 
manpower. It is alleged in the subject FIR that ‘YSSS’ in connivance 
with the other accused defaulted payment to the complainant’s 
company. The subject FIR was registered under Sections 406, 420, 
4
323, 504, 506 and 120-B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereafter, 
‘the IPC’) against the accused, including the appellant herein on the 
allegation that ‘YSSS’, in connivance with the other accused defaulted 
payment to the company to the tune of Rs.9 Crores. Pursuant to the 
lodgement of the FIR, the appellant received notices dated nil, on 
06.08.2020 and 09.09.2020, issued under Section 91 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereafter, ‘the Cr.P.C.’) calling upon 
him to produce certain documents. Though, the appellant produced 
documents in his possession before the Investigating Officer, he got 
further notices insisting for production of more documents which, 
according to him, are not in his possession. It is in the aforesaid 
circumstances and raising various contentions that the appellant 
approached the High Court seeking quashment of the FIR, which 
is produced in these proceedings as Annexure P-9. 
5.	
Multifarious contentions have been raised, unsuccessfully, by the 
appellant to support his prayer for quashment of the subject FIR 
before the High Court. He reiterated such contentions before us, as 
well. But before dealing with such contentions, as also the challenge 
against the impugned judgment it is only apposite to refer to the 
relevant recitals from the subject FIR, which read as follows: -
“About all aforementioned people conniving with intention to 
cause loss to the Applicant and to make gain for themselves, 
hatching criminal conspiracy, committing cheating, fraud 
and. forgery against the Applicant and misappropriating 
Applicant’s money - Hon’ble Sir, This is to submit that 
Applicant Tahir, Partner M/s RT Construction, 202 B/9, 
Ground Floor, Thatwari Complex, Westend Road, Near 
Meerut Public School, Meerut ant, Meerut has been doing 
his) business from a long time. The Applicant has been doing 
business of construction for approximately the last 30 years. 
Applicant’s brother Nasir and Partner Ravindra to look after 
the said business along with the Applicant. Applicant has 
been providing various services in construction including 
providing services of skilled and unskilled labourers to 
other companies. Aforementioned No. - 6 SEUNG HWI, 
HER (Managing Director) YOU SEUNG SANG SA INDIA 
CONSTRUCTION PVT LTD (YSSS), which is a subsidiary 
company of the main company MS HUNDAI MOTOR 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
5
Kim Wansoo v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
INDIA GROUP, had issued a work order to the Applicant 
on 15.06.2018 because the Applicant has been providing 
labourers to Korean company for long time. Therefore, on 
basis of Applicant’s good will, aforementioned people sent 
work order on Applicant’s mail ID, photo copy of which 
was sent to the Applicant at bis. house at Meerut by the 
aforementioned person) through their employee. Applicant 
finalized final rates after discussing with all aforementioned 
persons and after the officers of aforementioned company 
agreed to it, contract was drafted in Meerut and work was 
assigned. Applicant’s company provided labourers as per 
requirements of the aforementioned company from August 
2018 till 2019, for which the Applicant made bills on time 
to time and gave to the aforementioned persons. The Bill 
was to the tune of approximately Rs 9 crore, of which the 
aforementioned company paid Rs.1,70,51,000/- to the 
Applicant from time to time. Thereafter, while misleading the 
Applicant, additional work to the tune of Rs 8,31,94,200/- 
was done. The Applicant gave good performance because 
the Applicant felt that it was a foreign company and India 
should not be maligned. After the work was completed, 
M/S YOU SEUNG SANG SA INDIA CONSTRUCTION 
PVT LTD (YSSS) issued cheques of approximately 
Rs.8,31,94,200/- in favour of Applicant’s partnership firm, 
all of which were dishonoured. Thea Applicant complained 
to M/S HUNDAI MOTOR INDIA, which is the main 
company, on which M/S YOU SEUNG SANG SA INDIA 
CONSTRUCTION PVT LTD (YSSS) was summoned and 
a reconciliation was made not to file any case and now 
our other company. MS KOTEC AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE 
INDIA (P) LTD shall make payment to you because M/S 
YOU SEUNG SANG SA INDIA CONSTRUCTION PVT 
LTD (YSSS) had largest liability towards the Applicant, 
which was to the tune of approximately Rs 8,31,94,200/- 
aforementioned company M/S HUNDAI MOTOR INDIA 
settled payments of 16 persons along with the Applicant 
and while accepting its responsibility nominated M/S Khaan 
OTEC AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE INDIA (P) LTD, which is a 
part of aforementioned company, to handle moneys. Officers 
6
of aforementioned company agreed that now payment of 
only Rs. 7,67,30,826/- shall be done to Applicant, to which 
the Applicant agreed. Of this, 40 per cent payment was 
to be done by the aforementioned company immediately 
and the remaining payment was to be made after two 
months. Officers of aforementioned companies reduced 
this reconciliation in writing and gave a copy of it to the 
Applicant and also gave two cheques of Rs. 61,38,446/- 
and Rs 2,45,53,864/- on 30.11.2019, of which cheque of 
Rs 61,38,446/- was encashed and the remaining cheque 
of Rs.2,45,53,864/- was dishonoured. The Applicant kept 
on visiting the aforementioned persons repeatedly but 
all aforementioned persons kept on giving excuses and 
avoiding the Applicant. Applicant and Applicant’s brother 
Nasir went to the. office of aforementioned persons on 
03.10.2019 to demand payment but the aforementioned 
persons misbehaved with Applicant, his brother and partner 
Ravindra Kumar, subjected them to obscenities and issued 
threat to kill them if they went there again. Also, there was 
no reply to several phone calls made. Applicant’s brother 
Nasir Ali Khan kept on visiting the office of aforementioned 
persons for remaining amount but “the aforementioned 
persons did not give any money to Applicant and his 
brother Nasir Ali Khan. Instead, on last visit to the office 
of aforementioned persons, aforementioned persons 
assaulted and abused Applicant’s brother, as; result of which 
applicant’s brother suffered serious trauma and because of 
which Applicant’s brother Nasir Ali Khan passed away on 
30.01.2020. Applicant has proof of acts ‘of aforementioned 
persons in the form of documents in his safe custody, all of 
which are enclosed to the Application. All aforementioned 
persons have indulged in criminal conspiracy and forged 
documents through their company to commit cheating, fraud 
and misappropriation against Applicant-and other persons. 
Applicant has lodged complaint in aforementioned matter at 
Sadar Bazar Police Station but no action has been taken 
till this date. Therefore, request is being made to Hon’ble 
Sir to kindly order Officer In-Charge of Sadar Bazar Police 
Station to register case against aforementioned persons 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
7
Kim Wansoo v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
under aforementioned sections and take stringent legal 
action against them and to help the Applicant to recover 
aforementioned amount from the aforementioned persons.”
(underline supplied) 
6.	
It is worthwhile to refer to some of the decisions of this Court in regard 
to the power of the High Court to quash criminal proceedings before 
considering the rival contentions with reference to the allegations 
made in the subject FIR, as extracted above. It is true that normally, 
quashing of criminal proceedings would be sought and would be done 
in exercise of the inherent power of the High Court under Section 
482, Cr.P.C. But certainly, that does not mean that it could not be 
done only in invocation of the extraordinary power under Article 
226 of the Constitution of India. This position was made clear by 
this Court in State of Haryana and Ors. v. Bhajan Lal and Ors.1 
After considering the statutory provisions of Cr.P.C. and the earlier 
decisions of this Court, in the said decision this Court held that in 
the following categories of cases, the extraordinary power under 
Article 226 or the inherent power under Section 482, Cr. P.C. could 
be exercised by the High Court, either to prevent abuse of process 
of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. This Court 
went on to observe and hold that it might not be possible to lay 
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and 
inflexible guidelines or rigid formula and exhaustive list of myriad kinds 
of cases wherein such power should be exercised and encapsulate 
the following cases falling under such categories: -
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various 
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of 
the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series 
of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary 
power under Article 226 or the inherent powers under 
Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and 
reproduced above, we give the following categories of 
cases by way of illustration wherein such power could 
be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of 
any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, 
1	
1990 INSC 363 : [1990] Supp. 3 SCR 259 : AIR 1992 SC 604; 
8
though it may not be possible to lay down any precise, 
clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible 
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list 
of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be 
exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information 
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their 
face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima 
facie constitute any offence or make out a case against 
the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report 
and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not 
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation 
by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except 
under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 
155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR 
or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the 
same do not disclose the commission of any offence and 
make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a 
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable 
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer 
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under 
Section 155(2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint 
are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of 
which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion 
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the 
accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any 
of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under 
which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution 
and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there 
is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, 
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the 
aggrieved party.
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
9
Kim Wansoo v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended 
with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously 
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance 
on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private 
and personal grudge.
7.	
The said position was reiterated by this Court in Pepsi Foods Ltd. 
and Anr. v. Special Judicial Magistrate and Ors.2 This Court held 
therein that the High Court could exercise its power of judicial review 
in criminal matters and it could exercise this power either under Article 
226 of the Constitution or under Section 482, Cr. P.C. to prevent 
abuse of the process of the Court or to secure the ends of justice. 
Furthermore, it was held that exercise of that power would depend 
upon the facts and circumstances of each case. 
8.	
In regard to quashing of criminal proceedings at the investigation 
stage itself, this Court in Eastern Spg. Mills v. Rajiv Poddar,3 
held that the High Court could interfere with the investigation, if 
non-interference would result in miscarriage of justice. 
9.	
In State of A.P. v. Golconda Linga Swamy,4 this Court again held 
that where an FIR did not disclose the commission of an offence 
without anything being added or subtracted from the recitals thereof, 
the said FIR could be quashed. 
10.	 We have already extracted the relevant recitals in the subject FIR. 
Despite our microscopic examination of the allegations raised 
thereunder, except some vague allegations, no specific allegation 
could be seen made against the appellant herein or against the 
company by name ‘HEC India LLP’ wherein he was the Project 
Manager. That apart, a scanning of the subject FIR would reveal 
that after making some allegations, the complainant viz., the 4th 
respondent herein sought for registration of a case against the 
persons named therein, including the appellant herein to help the 
complainant/appellant herein to recover the amount mentioned 
therein. In this context, it is to be seen that the allegations therein 
would reveal that the complaint of committing default in payment 
2	
1997 INSC 714 : [1997] Supp. 5 SCR 12 : AIR 1998 SC 128;
3	
AIR 1985 SC 1668
4	
2004 INSC 404 : [2004] Supp. 3 SCR 147 : (2004) 6 SCC 522; 
10
of an amount around Rs.9 Crores was not made against the 
appellant herein or against the company in which he was the Project 
Manager, whereas it was made against a different company/different 
companies. 
11.	 In the contextual situation, it is also relevant to refer to the decision 
of this Court in Mohammad Wajid and Another. v. State of U.P. and 
Anr.,5 whereunder this Court, in so far as it is relevant, held thus: - 
“34……...it will not be just enough for the Court to look into 
the averments made in the FIR/complaint alone for the 
purpose of ascertaining whether the necessary ingredients 
to constitute the alleged offence are disclosed or not. In 
frivolous or vexatious proceedings, the Court owes a duty 
to look into many other attending circumstances emerging 
from the record of the case over and above the averments 
and, if need be, with due care and circumspection try to 
read in between the lines. The Court while exercising its 
jurisdiction under Section 482 of the CrPC or Article 226 of 
the Constitution need not restrict itself only to the stage of 
a case but is empowered to take into account the overall 
circumstances leading to the initiation/registration of the 
case as well as the materials collected in the course of 
investigation….” 
12.	 On judging the case on hand with reference to the allegations 
extracted hereinbefore, in the light of the decisions referred supra, 
we have absolutely no hesitation to hold that the High Court clearly 
erred in refusing to exercise the extraordinary power under Article 
226 of the Constitution of India to quash the subject FIR No.64/2020 
and all further proceedings in pursuance thereof, qua the appellant. 
13.	 A perusal of the subject FIR would reveal that the same did not 
disclose commission of offence(s) as alleged without anything 
being added to the recitals thereof. That apart, besides the vague 
allegations, the rest of them, even if taken as true, would not disclose 
the commission of any offence and make out a case against, the 
appellant. In such circumstances, asking the appellant to stand the 
5	
2023 INSC 683 : [2023] 11 SCR 313 : 2023 SCC Online SC 951; 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
11
Kim Wansoo v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
trial will be nothing but an abuse of process of law and as such, 
non-interference by refusing to exercise the power to quash the FIR 
and further proceedings based thereon, would result in miscarriage 
of justice. 
14.	 In such circumstances, this appeal is liable to be allowed and 
resultantly it is allowed and the judgment dated 26.08.2020 in Criminal 
Misc. Writ Petition No.8063 of 2020 is set aside. As a necessary 
sequel, the subject FIR No.64/2020 registered at Police Station, 
Sadar Bazar, District Meerut and all further proceedings pursuant 
thereto, qua the appellant stand quashed and set aside. 
15.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand dispose of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain