[2025] 1 S.C.R. 40 : 2025 INSC 1
M/s Naresh Potteries  
v. 
M/s Aarti Industries and Another
(Criminal Appeal No. 07 of 2025) 
02 January 2025
[B.R. Gavai* and K.V. Viswanathan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards whether the complaint filed by the appellant 
u/s. 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 is in accordance 
with the requirement u/s.142 of the NI Act.
Headnotes†
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 – ss.138, 142 – Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 – ss.190, 200 – Cognizance of 
offence – Complaint filed by the appellant-power of attorney 
holder and manager of the appellant-firm u/s.138 against 
respondent no.1 – Order passed to summon, the sole 
owner of respondent no.1 – Application u/s.482 Cr.P.C. by 
respondent no.1 seeking quashing of the summoning order 
as well as the entire proceedings of the complaint case on 
the ground that complaint filed by Manager on behalf of the  
appellant-firm rendered defective as there was no specific 
averment with regard to his knowledge about the transaction 
in the relevant documents – Application allowed by the High 
Court – Correctness:
Held: Ordinarily, u/s. 190 Cr.P.C., a Magistrate is empowered to 
take cognizance of an offence upon receiving a complaint of facts 
which constitute such offence – Prior to taking such cognizance, as 
provided by s. 200 Cr.P.C., the Magistrate is required to examine 
upon oath the complainant and witness present, if any – However, 
s.142 creates a legal bar on the court from taking cognizance of 
any offence punishable u/s. 138 except upon a complaint, in writing, 
made by the payee, or as the case may be, the holder in due course 
of the cheque – On facts, the perusal of the complaint would reveal 
that complaint has been filed in the name of the firm through Manager 
* Author
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
41
M/s Naresh Potteries v. M/s Aarti Industries and Another
and Authority-letter holder, and the cheque, was issued in the name 
of the firm – Complaint satisfied the requirements of s.142 – Letter 
of Authority, the affidavit in support of the complaint and the affidavit 
of evidence u/s.200 Cr.P.C. reveal that the power of attorney holder 
being the manager of the appellant-firm and the caretaker of its 
day-to-day business, was well-conversant with the transactions 
which led to the issuance of the cheque to the appellant-firm and 
which eventually led to the initiation of the criminal proceedings 
against respondent No.1 – Sole proprietor of the appellant-firm had 
duly authorized the Manager to act on its behalf – What can be 
treated as an explicit averment, cannot be put in a straightjacket 
but will have to be gathered from the circumstance and manner 
in which it has been averred and conveyed, based on the facts 
of each case – Averments made in the documents make it wholly 
clear that the Manager possessed personal knowledge of the facts 
of the matter at hand and was well-equipped and duly authorised 
to initiate criminal proceedings against respondent no.1– As such, 
peremptory quashing of complaint case by High Court completely 
unwarranted and that too on incorrect factual basis, on completely 
perfunctory and erroneous reasoning depicting absence of careful 
consideration – Interference by the High Court in exercise of its 
discretionary powers u/s.482 Cr.P.C. not called for – Judgment and 
order passed by the High Court quashed and set aside – Complaint 
restored to the file. [Paras 13, 16, 24-28, 32-36]
Case Law Cited
TRL Krosaki Refractories Limited v. SMS Asia Private Limited and 
Another 2022 INSC 214 : [2022] 2 SCR 268 : (2022) 7 SCC 612; 
Shankar Finance and Investments v. State of Andhra Pradesh and 
Ors. 2008 INSC 763 : [2008] 10 SCR 905 : (2008) 8 SCC 536; 
Praveen v. Mohd. Tajuddin (2009) 12 SCC 706; A.C. Narayanan 
v. State of Maharashtra and Another 2015 INSC 69 : [2015] 11 
SCR 1016 : (2014) 11 SCC 790; Vinita S. Rao v. Essen Corporate 
Services Private Limited and Another, 2014 INSC 643 : (2015) 1 
SCC 527; National Small Industries Corporation Limited v. State 
(NCT of Delhi) and Others 2008 INSC 1308 : [2008] 16 SCR 83 : 
(2009) 1 SCC 407; M.M.T.C. Ltd. and Another v. Medchl Chemicals 
& Pharma P. Limited and Another 2001 INSC 572 : [2001] Supp. 
5 SCR 265 : (2002) 1 SCC 234; Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani and 
Another v. IndusInd Bank Limited and Others 2004 INSC 695 : 
[2004] Supp. 6 SCR 681 : (2005) 2 SCC 217 – referred to.
42
List of Acts
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881; Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Cognizance of offence; Power of attorney holder; Summoning 
order; Specific pleading in Letter of Authority; Affidavit of power 
of attorney holder u/s.200 Cr.P.C.; Personal knowledge of facts; 
De jure complainant; De facto complainant; Payee or holder of 
cheque; Affidavit of evidence u/s.200 Cr.P.C.; Inherent powers 
u/s.482 Cr.P.C.; Fair investigation or prosecution; Discretionary 
powers u/s.482 Cr.P.C.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal  
No. 7 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 12.04.2023 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in A482 No. 29906 of 2022
Appearances for Parties
Navin Pahwa, Sr. Adv., Ms. Vak Rohini Wagh, Aditya Shukla, Anuj 
Tiwari, Saurabh Mishra, Bharat Thakorlal Manubarwala, Advs. for 
the Appellant.
Shailesh Sharma, Dr. Vijendra Singh, Ms. Shweta Yadav, 
Ms. Apurva Mahndiyan, Kumar Abhinandan, Advs. for the 
Respondents.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
B.R. Gavai, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal challenges the judgment and final order dated 12th 
April 2023 passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Miscellaneous Application 
No. 29906 of 2022. The learned Single Judge allowed the Criminal 
Miscellaneous Application filed by M/s Aarti Industries, Respondent 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
43
M/s Naresh Potteries v. M/s Aarti Industries and Another
No. 1 herein and quashed the summoning order dated 22nd November 
2021 passed by the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Khurja, 
Bulandshahar1  in Complaint Case No. 701 of 2021, as well as the entire 
proceedings arising from the said complaint case filed by the present 
appellant under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 18812, 
pending before the trial court in C.N.R. No. UPBU160012972021.
3.	
The facts giving rise to the present appeal are as follows:
3.1.	 M/s Naresh Properties through its Manager Neeraj Kumar, 
appellant herein, deals in the manufacture and sale of crockeries, 
insulators, polymer insulators and other such hardware fittings. 
3.2.	 Between the period from 18th June 2021 to 2nd July 2021, 
M/s Aarti Industries represented by its sole proprietor Sunita 
Devi, Respondent No. 1 herein, had purchased polymer 
insulators scrap rejected material, worth Rs. 1,70,46,314/- 
from the present appellant. After the materials were supplied 
to Respondent No.1, the appellant raised several bills/invoices 
seeking payment for the supplied goods.
3.3.	 Subsequently, on 12th July 2021, the appellant was given a 
cheque issued in its favour by Respondent No.1 for a sum of 
Rs.1,70,46,314/-. The said cheque bearing No. 086295 dated 
10th July 2021 had been drawn on the A/c No. 3640670725 
belonging to M/s Aarti Industries at the Central Bank of India, 
Branch Khurja.
3.4.	 Upon receiving the said cheque, the appellant deposited it in 
its A/c No. 07382560000285 at HDFC Bank, Branch Khurja on 
12th July 2021 for encashment.  However, the cheque came 
to be dishonoured and on 13th July 2021, the cheque was 
returned to the appellant with a return memo which stated that 
the cheque amount ‘exceeds arrangement’.
3.5.	 Aggrieved thereby, on behalf of Smt. Shakti Khanna, the 
owner/proprietor of the appellant-firm, a legal notice dated 
15th July 2021 was issued to Respondent No.1 through its sole 
proprietor, Sunita Devi under the NI Act. According to the legal 
notice, Respondent No.1 was to pay the cheque amount of 
1	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘trial court’.
2	
For short ‘NI Act’
44
Rs. 1,70,46,314/- within a period of 15 days of receiving the 
notice, failing which the offence punishable under Section 138 
of the NI Act was liable to be attracted.
3.6.	 Immediately thereafter, on 16th July 2021, as a counter blast 
to the legal notice, Angad the son of the sole proprietor of 
Respondent No.1 lodged a First Information Report under 
Sections 420, 467, 468 and 471 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 
against 7 accused persons. It was alleged that Ashish Khanna, 
the owner of the appellant-firm, the staff of the appellant-firm 
and the branch manager of the Central Bank of India, Branch 
Khurja had colluded together to obtain a cheque book in the 
name of M/s Aarti Industries by forging the signature of Sunita 
Devi. It was further alleged that the said cheque book containing 
cheques from SI No. 86281 to 86380 was thereafter used by the 
appellant-firm to issue two cheques - first, cheque No. 086291 
dated 10th July 2021 for a sum of Rs. 1,62,28,445/- issued in 
favour of Shakti Ceramics and second, cheque No. 086295 
dated 10th July 2021 for a sum of Rs. 1,70,46,314/- issued in 
favour of the present appellant. 
3.7.	 Subsequently, on 31st August 2021, Smt. Shakti Khanna being 
the sole proprietor of the appellant-firm issued a Letter of 
Authority thereby authorizing Sh. Neeraj Kumar, the manager 
and caretaker of the appellant-firm to file a complaint and 
take all such necessary steps in the matter of the dishonour 
of the cheque. 
3.8.	 Upon being so authorized, Sh. Neeraj Kumar in the name of 
M/s Naresh Potteries, filed a complaint being Complaint No. 
701 of 2021 under Section 138 of the NI Act on 8th September 
2021 against Respondent No.1 before the trial court. Being the 
deponent in the aforesaid complaint, Sh. Neeraj Kumar also 
filed an affidavit solemnly affirming that he was well-conversant 
with the facts and circumstances of the facts leading to the 
complaint and as such was competent to file the said affidavit.
3.9.	 Subsequently, on 22nd October 2021, Sh. Neeraj Kumar filed an 
Affidavit of Evidence under Section 200 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 19733, before the trial court wherein he reiterated 
3	
For short ‘Cr.P.C.’
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
45
M/s Naresh Potteries v. M/s Aarti Industries and Another
the facts of the complaint case and once again, affirmed that 
he was well-conversant with the facts and circumstances of 
the case, being the manager of the appellant-firm. 
3.10.	 On 22nd November 2021, on the basis of the evidence in the 
form of the aforesaid examination under Section 200 of the 
Cr.P.C. and the documentary evidence adduced, the trial court 
found that there was sufficient ground to issue summons to 
Sunita Devi, the sole owner/proprietor of Respondent No.1-firm 
for the offence punishable under Section 138 of the NI Act. 
Accordingly, an order was passed thereby summoning Sunita 
Devi to face trial for the aforesaid offence. 
3.11.	 Aggrieved thereby, Respondent No.1 preferred a Criminal 
Miscellaneous Application under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. 
to quash the aforesaid summoning order as well as the entire 
proceedings of the complaint case pending before the trial court.
3.12.	 The High Court by the impugned judgment and order allowed 
the Criminal Miscellaneous Application.
3.13.	 Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal.
4.	
We have heard Mr. Navin Pahwa, learned Senior Counsel, appearing 
on behalf of the appellant and Mr. Shailesh Sharma, learned counsel, 
appearing on behalf of Respondent No.2. 
5.	
In spite of being duly served, none appeared for Respondent No.1.
6.	
Mr. Navin Pahwa, learned Senior Counsel, submitted that the High 
Court had quashed the complaint case on an incorrect assumption 
of fact as well as an incorrect interpretation of the law laid down 
by this Court in TRL Krosaki Refractories Limited v. SMS Asia 
Private Limited and Another4. 
7.	
Mr. Navin Pahwa further submitted that the High Court had quashed 
the criminal case on the simple ground that from a conjoint reading 
of the averments made in the Letter of Authority and the affidavit of 
evidence under Section 200 of the Cr.P.C., Sh. Neeraj Kumar, the 
power of attorney holder was found to have no personal knowledge of 
the facts and circumstances of the case. He submitted that the only 
purpose of a sworn statement under Section 200 of the Cr.P.C. by 
4	
2022 INSC 214 : [2022] 2 SCR 268 : (2022) 7 SCC 612
46
the power of attorney holder who has knowledge of the facts stated 
in the complaint is to satisfy the court of the prima facie existence 
of an offence which is to be tried and the final outcome of the trial 
would be determined on the basis of the evidence. He submitted 
that, if necessary, the complainant could be called at a later stage 
for further examination and cross-examination. He submitted that this 
was beside the fact that the power of attorney holder in the present 
matter had on three separate occasions clearly stated that he had 
personal knowledge of the facts of the complaint case.
8.	
Mr. Navin Pahwa placed reliance on the judgments of this Court in 
the cases of Shankar Finance and Investments v. State of Andhra 
Pradesh and Ors.,5 Praveen v. Mohd. Tajuddin,6 A.C. Narayanan 
v. State of Maharashtra and Another7 and Vinita S. Rao v. Essen 
Corporate Services Private Limited and Another.8 He submitted 
that in view of the material placed on record and the authorities cited, 
the appeal deserves to be allowed and the impugned judgment and 
order deserves to be quashed and set aside.
9.	
On behalf of Respondent No.2, Mr. Shailesh Sharma, learned counsel, 
has submitted that the present matter is essentially a dispute between 
private parties. He has adopted the submissions of the appellant and 
has prayed that the appeal may be allowed.
10.	 We have considered the rival submissions and perused the material 
placed on record.
11.	 The solitary question that we are called upon to answer is as to 
whether the complaint filed by the appellant herein under Section 138 
of the NI Act is in accordance with the requirement under Section 142 
of the NI Act.
12.	 The relevant provision of the NI Act that falls for our consideration 
is as follows:
“142. Cognizance of offences.—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974),—
5	
2008 INSC 763 : [2008] 10 SCR 905 : (2008) 8 SCC 536
6	
(2009) 12 SCC 706
7	
2015 INSC 69 : [2015] 11 SCR 1016 : (2014) 11 SCC 790
8	
2014 INSC 643 : (2015) 1 SCC 527
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
47
M/s Naresh Potteries v. M/s Aarti Industries and Another
(a)	 no court shall take cognizance of any offence 
punishable under Section 138 except upon a 
complaint, in writing, made by the payee or, as the 
case may be, the holder in due course of the cheque;
…………….”
13.	 Ordinarily, under Section 190 of the Cr.P.C., a Magistrate is 
empowered to take cognizance of an offence upon receiving a 
complaint of facts which constitute such offence. Prior to taking such 
cognizance, in accordance with and as provided by Section 200 of 
the Cr.P.C., the Magistrate is required to examine upon oath the 
complainant and witness present, if any. However, Section 142 of 
the NI Act creates a legal bar on the court from taking cognizance 
of any offence punishable under Section 138 of the NI Act except 
upon a complaint, in writing, made by the payee, or as the case may 
be, the holder in due course of the cheque.
14.	 The law on the subject-matter at hand is no longer res integra and 
has been well-settled by a series of judgments passed by this Court. 
15.	 This Court in the case of National Small Industries Corporation 
Limited v. State (NCT of Delhi) and Others9 had an occasion to 
consider the validity of a complaint under Section 138 of the NI Act 
and the satisfaction of the requirement under Section 142 thereof, 
as well as to determine as to who could be considered to be the 
complainant/representative in a case where the complaint is to be 
filed by an incorporated body. This Court held as follows:
“14. The term “complainant” is not defined under the 
Code. Section 142 of the NI Act requires a complaint 
under Section 138 of that Act to be made by the payee 
(or by the holder in due course). It is thus evident that in 
a complaint relating to dishonour of a cheque (which has 
not been endorsed by the payee in favour of anyone), it 
is the payee alone who can be the complainant. The NI 
Act only provides that dishonour of a cheque would be an 
offence and the manner of taking cognizance of offences 
punishable under Section 138 of that Act. However, the 
procedure relating to initiation of proceedings, trial and 
9	
2008 INSC 1308 : [2008] 16 SCR 83 : (2009) 1 SCC 407
48
disposal of such complaints, is governed by the Code. 
Section 200 of the Code requires that the Magistrate, 
on taking cognizance of an offence on complaint, shall 
examine upon oath the complainant and the witnesses 
present and the substance of such examination shall be 
reduced to writing and shall be signed by the complainant 
and the witnesses. The requirement of Section 142 of the 
NI Act that the payee should be the complainant, is met if 
the complaint is in the name of the payee. If the payee is a 
company, necessarily the complaint should be filed in the 
name of the company. Section 142 of the NI Act does not 
specify who should represent the company, if a company 
is the complainant. A company can be represented by 
an employee or even by a non-employee authorised 
and empowered to represent the company either by 
a resolution or by a power of attorney.
…..
19. Resultantly, when in a complaint in regard to dishonour 
of a cheque issued in favour of a company or corporation, 
for the purpose of Section 142 of the NI Act, the company 
will be the complainant, and for purposes of Section 200 
of the Code, its employee who represents the company 
or corporation, will be the de facto complainant. In 
such a complaint, the de jure complainant, namely, the 
company or corporation will remain the same but the 
de facto complainant (employee) representing such de 
jure complainant can change, from time to time. And if 
the de facto complainant is a public servant, the benefit of 
exemption under clause (a) of the proviso to Section 200 
of the Code will be available, even though the complaint 
is made in the name of a company or corporation.”
(emphasis supplied)
16.	 While this Court was primarily concerned with the issue relating to 
the exemption available against examining a public servant in view 
of Section 200(a) of the Cr.P.C., this Court nevertheless clarified that 
the requirement of Section 142 of the NI Act that the payee should 
be the complainant would be met if the complaint is in the name 
of the payee. Where the payee is a company, this Court observed 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
49
M/s Naresh Potteries v. M/s Aarti Industries and Another
that the complaint should necessarily be filed in the name of the 
company, if the company is the complainant. In such cases, this 
Court held that a company can be represented by an employee 
or even a non-employee authorised and empowered to represent 
the company either by a resolution or by a power of attorney. As a 
consequence of the aforesaid discussion, this Court concluded that 
for the purposes of Section 142 of the NI Act, the company will be 
the complainant and for the purposes of Section 200 of the Cr.P.C., 
its employee who represents the company, will be the de facto 
complainant while the company will remain the de jure complainant, 
regardless of any change in the de facto complainant.
17.	 Having discussed as to who could file a complaint on behalf of 
an incorporated body, it would be apposite to consider the legal 
validity of a complaint by the power of attorney holder of such an 
incorporated body. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in the case of 
A.C. Narayanan (supra) was called upon to answer a reference with 
regard to the conflicting decisions delivered by two Division Benches 
of this Court in M.M.T.C. Ltd. and Another v. Medchl Chemicals & 
Pharma P. Limited and Another10 and Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani and 
Another v. IndusInd Bank Limited and Others.11 While answering 
the reference, what fell for consideration before this Court was the 
maintainability of a complaint under Section 138 of the NI Act filed 
by the power of attorney holder on behalf of the original complainant 
and the necessity of specific averments as to the knowledge of the 
power of attorney holder with respect to the facts and circumstances 
leading to the dishonour of the cheque(s) and the preference of the 
criminal proceedings. This Court held as follows:
“21. In terms of the reference order, the following questions 
have to be decided by this Bench:
21.1. Whether a power-of-attorney holder can sign and 
file a complaint petition on behalf of the complainant?/
Whether the eligibility criteria prescribed by Section 142(a) 
of the NI Act would stand satisfied if the complaint petition 
itself is filed in the name of the payee or the holder in due 
course of the cheque?
10	
2001 INSC 572 : [2001] Supp. 5 SCR 265 : (2002) 1 SCC 234
11	
2004 INSC 695 : [2004] Supp. 6 SCR 681 : (2005) 2 SCC 217
50
21.2. Whether a power-of-attorney holder can be verified 
on oath under Section 200 of the Code?
21.3. Whether specific averments as to the knowledge of 
the power-of-attorney holder in the impugned transaction 
must be explicitly asserted in the complaint?
21.4. If the power-of-attorney holder fails to assert explicitly 
his knowledge in the complaint then can the power-of-
attorney holder verify the complaint on oath on such 
presumption of knowledge?
21.5. Whether the proceedings contemplated under Section 
200 of the Code can be dispensed with in the light of 
Section 145 of the NI Act which was introduced by an 
amendment in the year 2002?
….
28. The power-of-attorney holder is the agent of the 
grantor. When the grantor authorises the attorney holder 
to initiate legal proceedings and the attorney holder 
accordingly initiates such legal proceedings, he does so 
as the agent of the grantor and the initiation is by the 
grantor represented by his attorney holder and not by the 
attorney holder in his personal capacity. Therefore, where 
the payee is a proprietary concern, the complaint 
can be filed by the proprietor of the proprietary 
concern, describing himself as the sole proprietor of 
the payee, the proprietary concern, describing itself 
as a sole proprietary concern, represented by its 
sole proprietor, and the proprietor or the proprietary 
concern represented by the attorney holder under a 
power of attorney executed by the sole proprietor. 
However, we make it clear that the power-of-attorney 
holder cannot file a complaint in his own name as if 
he was the complainant. In other words, he can initiate 
criminal proceedings on behalf of the principal.
29. From a conjoint reading of Sections 138, 142 and 145 of 
the NI Act as well as Section 200 of the Code, it is clear that 
it is open to the Magistrate to issue process on the basis of 
the contents of the complaint, documents in support thereof 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
51
M/s Naresh Potteries v. M/s Aarti Industries and Another
and the affidavit submitted by the complainant in support 
of the complaint. Once the complainant files an affidavit in 
support of the complaint before issuance of the process 
under Section 200 of the Code, it is thereafter open to the 
Magistrate, if he thinks fit, to call upon the complainant to 
remain present and to examine him as to the facts contained 
in the affidavit submitted by the complainant in support of 
his complaint. However, it is a matter of discretion and the 
Magistrate is not bound to call upon the complainant to 
remain present before the court and to examine him upon 
oath for taking decision whether or not to issue process 
on the complaint under Section 138 of the NI Act. For the 
purpose of issuing process under Section 200 of the Code, 
it is open to the Magistrate to rely upon the verification in 
the form of affidavit filed by the complainant in support of 
the complaint under Section 138 of the NI Act. It is only if 
and where the Magistrate, after considering the complaint 
under Section 138 of the NI Act, documents produced in 
support thereof and the verification in the form of affidavit 
of the complainant, is of the view that examination of the 
complainant or his witness(s) is required, the Magistrate 
may call upon the complainant to remain present before 
the court and examine the complainant and/or his witness 
upon oath for taking a decision whether or not to issue 
process on the complaint under Section 138 of the NI Act.
….
33. While holding that there is no serious conflict between 
the decisions in M.M.T.C. [M.M.T.C. Ltd. v. Medchl 
Chemicals and Pharma (P) Ltd. (2002) 1 SCC 234 : 
2002 SCC (Cri) 121] and Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani [Janki 
Vashdeo Bhojwani v. IndusInd Bank Ltd. (2005) 2 SCC 
217], we clarify the position and answer the questions in 
the following manner:
33.1. Filing of complaint petition under Section 138 
of the NI Act through power of attorney is perfectly 
legal and competent.
33.2. The power-of-attorney holder can depose and 
verify on oath before the court in order to prove the 
52
contents of the complaint. However, the power-of-
attorney holder must have witnessed the transaction as 
an agent of the payee/holder in due course or possess 
due knowledge regarding the said transactions.
33.3. It is required by the complainant to make 
specific assertion as to the knowledge of the power-
of-attorney holder in the said transaction explicitly in 
the complaint and the power-of-attorney holder who 
has no knowledge regarding the transactions cannot 
be examined as a witness in the case.
33.4. In the light of Section 145 of the NI Act, it is open to 
the Magistrate to rely upon the verification in the form of 
affidavit filed by the complainant in support of the complaint 
under Section 138 of the NI Act and the Magistrate is 
neither mandatorily obliged to call upon the complainant 
to remain present before the Court, nor to examine the 
complainant of his witness upon oath for taking the decision 
whether or not to issue process on the complaint under 
Section 138 of the NI Act.
33.5. The functions under the general power of attorney 
cannot be delegated to another person without specific 
clause permitting the same in the power of attorney. 
Nevertheless, the general power of attorney itself can be 
cancelled and be given to another person.
34. We answer the reference on the above terms and 
remit the matter to the appropriate Bench for deciding 
the case on merits.”
(emphasis supplied)
18.	 This Court while answering the reference has thoroughly considered 
the scope and requirement of Section 142(1)(a) of the NI Act. This 
Court held that from a conjoint reading of Sections 138, 142 and 145 
of the NI Act as well as Section 200 of the Cr.P.C., it is clear that 
calling upon the complainant to remain present and to examine him 
as to the facts contained in the affidavit submitted by the complainant 
to support his complaint, is a matter of discretion on the part of 
the Magistrate. This Court clarified that it is only if and where the 
Magistrate, after considering all the relevant documents, is of the 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
53
M/s Naresh Potteries v. M/s Aarti Industries and Another
view that examination of the complainant or his witness(s) is required, 
the Magistrate may call upon the complainant to remain present 
before the court and examine the complainant and/or his witness 
upon oath for taking a decision whether or not to issue process on 
the complaint under Section 138 of the NI Act.
19.	 After discussing the discretionary powers of the Magistrate, this Court 
went on to hold that the power of attorney holder may be allowed 
to file, appear and depose for the purpose of issue of process for 
the offence punishable under Section 138 of the NI Act. This Court, 
however, cautioned that an exception to the above would be when the 
power-of-attorney holder does not have a personal knowledge about 
the transactions, in which case, he cannot be examined. Nevertheless, 
this Court clarified that where the power-of-attorney holder of the 
complainant is in charge of the business of the complainant payee 
and the power of attorney holder alone is personally aware of the 
transactions, there is no reason why he cannot depose as a witness, 
however, such personal knowledge must be explicitly asserted in 
the complaint and a power-of-attorney holder who has no personal 
knowledge of the transactions cannot be examined as a witness in 
the case.
20.	 More recently, in the case of TRL Krosaki Refractories Limited 
(supra) similar facts as the present matter arose for consideration 
by this Court. In the said case, a complaint came to be filed by the 
payee company through its General Manager (Accounting) under 
Sections 138 and 142 of the NI Act. The complaint was registered 
based on the affidavit filed on behalf of the complainant, in lieu of an 
oral sworn statement. Upon being satisfied that there was sufficient 
material and the complaint under Section 138 of the NI Act against 
the accused was in accordance with law, the SDJM took cognizance 
of the complaint and issued summons to the accused-firm therein. 
Assailing the summoning order, the accused-firm filed a petition before 
the High Court under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. for quashing of the 
summoning order, being aggrieved by the fact that the complaint had 
been filed by an incompetent person inasmuch as the complainant 
neither had knowledge about the alleged transaction, nor had he 
witnessed the same, nor was there any averment in the complaint 
that the complainant had been duly authorized by the payee-firm 
to initiate criminal proceedings on its behalf. The High Court had 
allowed the petition under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. and set aside the 
54
summoning order, which led to an appeal being filed before this Court. 
A three-Judge Bench of this Court upon a thorough consideration of 
the judgments of this Court by which the law on the subject-matter 
at hand has been crystallised, allowed the appeal and set aside the 
judgment of the High Court. This Court held as follows:
“21. A meaningful reading of the above would indicate 
that the company having authorised the General Manager 
(Accounting) and the General Manager (Accounting) having 
personal knowledge had in fact been clearly averred. What 
can be treated as an explicit averment, cannot be put 
in a straitjacket but will have to be gathered from the 
circumstance and the manner in which it has been 
averred and conveyed, based on the facts of each case. 
The manner in which a complaint is drafted may vary 
from case to case and would also depend on the skills 
of the person drafting the same which by itself, cannot 
defeat a substantive right. However, what is necessary 
to be taken note of is as to whether the contents as 
available in the pleading would convey the meaning to 
the effect that the person who has filed the complaint, is 
stated to be authorised and claims to have knowledge 
of the same. In addition, the supporting documents which 
were available on the record by themselves demonstrate 
the fact that an authorised person, being a witness to 
the transaction and having knowledge of the case had 
instituted the complaint on behalf of the “payee” company 
and therefore, the requirement of Section 142 of the NI Act 
was satisfied. In Vinita S. Rao v. Essen Corporate Services 
(P) Ltd. [Vinita S. Rao v. Essen Corporate Services (P) 
Ltd., (2015) 1 SCC 527 : (2015) 1 SCC (Civ) 558 : (2015) 
1 SCC (Cri) 726], to which one of us (the Hon’ble CJI) 
was a member of the Bench has accepted the pleading 
of such a nature to indicate the power to prosecute the 
complaint and knowledge of the transaction as sufficient 
to maintain the complaint.
22. Despite our conclusion that the documents available 
on record would on facts satisfy the requirement relating to 
delegation of power and also knowledge of the transaction 
by the person representing the Company in the instant case, 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
55
M/s Naresh Potteries v. M/s Aarti Industries and Another
it is also necessary for us to keep in perspective that 
though the case in A.C. Narayanan [A.C. Narayanan v.  
State of Maharashtra (2014) 11 SCC 790 : (2014) 4 SCC 
(Civ) 343] has taken the centre stage of consideration, 
the facts involved therein were in the background of 
the complainant being an individual and the complaint 
filed was based on the power of attorney issued by the 
“payee” who was also an individual. In such an event, 
the manner in which the power was being exercised 
was to be explicitly stated so as to establish the right 
of the person prosecuting the complaint, to represent 
the payee i.e. the complainant. The position that 
would emerge when the complainant is a company 
or a corporate entity will have to be viewed from a 
different standpoint.
23. In this regard in Samrat Shipping Co. (P) Ltd. v. 
Dolly George [Samrat Shipping Co. (P) Ltd. v. Dolly 
George (2002) 9 SCC 455 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 1224], while 
disapproving the manner in which cognizance was refused 
to be taken and the complaint had been dismissed by the 
learned Magistrate at the threshold, this Court has held 
as hereunder : (SCC p. 456, para 3)
“3. Having heard both sides we find it difficult 
to support the orders challenged before us. 
A company can file a complaint only through 
human agency. The person who presented the 
complaint on behalf of the Company claimed 
that he is the authorised representative of the 
company. Prima facie, the trial court should have 
accepted it at the time when a complaint was 
presented. If it is a matter of evidence when 
the accused disputed the authority of the said 
individual to present the complaint, opportunity 
should have been given to the complainant 
to prove the same, but that opportunity need 
be given only when the trial commences. The 
dismissal of the complaint at the threshold on 
the premise that the individual has not produced 
certified copy of the resolution appears to be 
56
too hasty an action. We, therefore, set aside 
the impugned orders and direct the trial court 
to proceed with the trial and dispose of it in 
accordance with law. Parties are directed to 
appear before the trial court on 31-1-2000.”
25. In that view, the position that would emerge is that 
when a company is the payee of the cheque based 
on which a complaint is filed under Section 138 of 
the NI Act, the complainant necessarily should be 
the company which would be represented by an 
employee who is authorised. Prima facie, in such 
a situation the indication in the complaint and the 
sworn statement (either orally or by affidavit) to the 
effect that the complainant (Company) is represented 
by an authorised person who has knowledge, would 
be sufficient. The employment of the terms “specific 
assertion as to the knowledge of the power-of-attorney 
holder” and such assertion about knowledge should 
be “said explicitly” as stated in A.C. Narayanan [A.C. 
Narayanan v. State of Maharashtra (2014) 11 SCC 
790 : (2014) 4 SCC (Civ) 343] cannot be understood 
to mean that the assertion should be in any particular 
manner, much less only in the manner understood by 
the accused in the case. All that is necessary is to 
demonstrate before the learned Magistrate that the 
complaint filed is in the name of the “payee” and if the 
person who is prosecuting the complaint is different 
from the payee, the authorisation therefor and that the 
contents of the complaint are within his knowledge. 
When, the complainant/payee is a company, an authorised 
employee can represent the company. Such averment and 
prima facie material is sufficient for the learned Magistrate 
to take cognizance and issue process. If at all, there is any 
serious dispute with regard to the person prosecuting the 
complaint not being authorised or if it is to be demonstrated 
that the person who filed the complaint has no knowledge 
of the transaction and, as such that person could not have 
instituted and prosecuted the complaint, it would be open 
for the accused to dispute the position and establish the 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
57
M/s Naresh Potteries v. M/s Aarti Industries and Another
same during the course of the trial. As noted in Samrat 
Shipping Co. [Samrat Shipping Co. (P) Ltd. v. Dolly George 
(2002) 9 SCC 455 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 1224], dismissal of 
a complaint at the threshold by the Magistrate on the 
question of authorisation, would not be justified. Similarly, 
we are of the view that in such circumstances entertaining 
a petition under Section 482 to quash the order taking 
cognizance by the Magistrate would be unjustified when 
the issue of proper authorisation and knowledge can only 
be an issue for trial.
26. In that view of the matter, we are of the opinion that 
the High Court was not justified in entertaining the petition 
filed under Section 482 CrPC and quashing the order 
dated 5-11-2015, taking cognizance of the complaint filed 
by the appellant.”
(emphasis supplied)
21.	 It could thus be seen that this Court distinguished the position of 
a complainant filing a complaint on behalf of an individual from the 
position of a complainant filing a complaint on behalf of a company. 
This Court clarified that although the decision in the case of A.C. 
Narayanan (supra) had taken centre stage, the facts involved in that 
case were in the background that the complaint filed was based on the 
power of attorney issued by the ‘payee’ who was also an individual. 
In such cases, the manner in which the power was being exercised 
had to be explicitly stated. However, this Court clarified that the 
position that would emerge when the complainant is a company or 
a corporate entity will have to be viewed from a different standpoint. 
This Court held that when the company is the payee of the cheque 
based on which a complaint is filed under Section 138 of the NI Act, 
the complainant should necessarily be the company which is to be 
represented by an authorised employee and in such a situation, the 
indication in the complaint and the sworn statement, oral or by affidavit, 
to the effect that complainant is represented by an authorised person 
who has knowledge, would be sufficient. Drawing a distinction from 
the “specific assertion as to the knowledge of the power-of-attorney 
holder” which is to be “stated explicitly” as categorically laid down 
in A.C. Narayanan (supra), this Court held that in cases where 
the payee/complainant is the company, all that is necessary to be 
58
demonstrated before the Magistrate is that the complaint is filed in 
the name of the payee and if the complaint is being prosecuted by 
someone other than the payee, he has knowledge of the contents of 
the complaint and he is duly authorised to prosecute the complaint. 
This Court further clarified that if there is any dispute with regard to 
the person prosecuting the complaint not being authorised or it is 
to be demonstrated that the complainant had no knowledge of the 
transaction, and as such could not have instituted and prosecuted 
the complaint, it would be open for the accused person to dispute 
the position and establish the same during the course of the trial. 
However, dismissal or quashing of the complaint at the threshold 
would not be justified. It was held that the issue of proper authorisation 
and knowledge can only be an issue for trial.
22.	 Having discussed the law on the subject, we now proceed to consider 
the facts of the present case.
23.	 As we have noted earlier, despite being duly served, none appeared 
for Respondent No.1. 
24.	 From a perusal of the impugned order, we find that the issue raised 
by Respondent No.1 before the High Court is that complaint filed 
by Sh. Neeraj Kumar on behalf of the appellant-firm has been 
rendered defective as there is no specific averment with regard to 
his knowledge about the transaction in the relevant documents. To 
buttress its submission, reliance was placed on the decision in the 
case of A.C. Narayanan (supra).
25.	 We find that judgment passed by the High Court is entirely based on 
the guidelines laid down in A.C. Narayanan (supra). Although the 
High Court took note of the decision in TRL Krosaki Refractories 
Limited (supra), the sole reason on which it passed the impugned 
order was that there was no specific pleading in the Letter of Authority 
or the affidavit of the power of attorney holder under Section 200 
of the Cr.P.C. to the effect that he had personal knowledge of the 
facts giving rise to the proceedings under Section 138 of the NI Act 
and further that complaint was totally silent as to any such personal 
knowledge.
26.	 A perusal of the complaint (Annexure P-18) would reveal that 
Complaint No. 701 of 2021 has been filed in the name of M/s Naresh 
Potteries through Neeraj Kumar (Manager and Authority-letter holder). 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
59
M/s Naresh Potteries v. M/s Aarti Industries and Another
Further, a perusal of the cheque which is the subject-matter of the 
complaint would reveal that it has been issued in the name of Naresh 
Potteries. As aforementioned, Section 142 of the NI Act contemplates 
that the complaint filed under Section 138 of the NI Act should be in 
writing and should be filed by the payee or the holder of the cheque. 
Therefore, it is abundantly clear that the complaint in the present 
matter satisfies the requirements of Section 142 of the NI Act.
27.	 Further, a cumulative study of the relevant material being the Letter 
of Authority (Annexure P-9), the affidavit in support of the complaint 
(Annexure P-10) and the affidavit of evidence under Section 200 of 
the Cr.P.C. (Annexure P-11) would reveal that Sh. Neeraj Kumar, 
the power of attorney holder being the manager of the appellant-firm 
and the caretaker of its day-to-day business, was well-conversant 
with the transactions which led to the issuance of the cheque to the 
appellant-firm and which eventually led to the initiation of the criminal 
proceedings against Respondent No.1. 
28.	 Since the High Court has quashed the summoning order on a 
categorical finding that the power of attorney holder did not have 
personal knowledge of the facts giving rise to the criminal proceedings 
as there was no specific pleading to that effect in the letter of authority 
and the affidavit of the power of attorney holder under Section 200 
of the Cr.P.C., we find it apposite to reproduce the relevant portions 
of the aforesaid documents which contain averments regarding 
authorisation in favour of and knowledge on the part of Sh. Neeraj 
Kumar.
29.	 The Letter of Authority dated 31st August 2021 issued by the sole 
proprietor of the appellant-firm reads as under:
“Certified that I, Smt. Shakti Khanna, aged 72 years, w/o of 
Sh. Subhash Chand Khanna of M/s. Naresh Potteries, G.T. 
Road, Khurja 203131 (UP) in the capacity of sole proprietor 
of the above firm, authorize Sh. NEERAJ KUMAR s/o Sh. 
Suraj Narain, aged 42 years r/o H.No. 934, Chandralok 
Colony, Street No.4, Khurja PS, Khurja Nagar, District 
Bulandshahr, who is manager of the above firm and takes 
care of general and day-to-day managerial business of 
the firm and is very well conversant with everyday  affairs, 
financial transactions and sale-purchase of the firm, to 
file a complaint in the matter of dishonouring of cheque  
60
(No.086295 /10.07.2021 for a sum of Rs.1,79,46,3141-) 
against M/s. Arti Industries, Khurja in a competent Hon’ble 
Court on behalf of M/s, Naresh Potteries. Khurja. Sh, 
Neeraj is well aware of this case and is given necessary 
instructions also.”
30.	 The verifying affidavit filed on behalf of Sh. Neeraj Kumar in support 
of his complaint reads as under:
“02. Deponent is applicant in this case who is posted as 
manager in complainant firm M/s. Naresh Potteries, GT 
Road, Khurja and holds authority letter of the firm issued 
by the owner/proprietor Smt. Shakti Khanna and is well 
conversant with the facts and circumstances of the case. 
Thus, deponent is competent to file this affidavit.”
31.	 Further, the affidavit of evidence under Section 200 of the Cr.P.C. 
filed by Sh. Neeraj Kumar in lieu of the oral sworn statement before 
the trial court on the basis of which the trial court took cognizance 
of the complaint, reads thus:
“02. Deponent is applicant in this case who is posted 
as manager in complainant firm M/s. Naresh  Potteries,  
GT Road, Khurja and holds authority letter of the firm 
issued by the owner Smt. Shakti Khanna and is well 
conversant with the facts and circumstance of the case. 
Thus, deponent is competent to file this affidavit.”
32.	 A conjoint reading of the above would make it clear that it had been 
categorically averred that the sole proprietor of the appellant-firm 
had duly authorized Sh. Neeraj Kumar to act on its behalf in view 
of the fact that Sh. Neeraj Kumar was in-charge of the day-to-day 
affairs of the appellant-firm and as such had personal knowledge of 
the facts of the matter. 
33.	 As referred to above, this Court in TRL Krosaki Refractories 
Limited (supra) had come to a categorical finding that what can be 
treated as an explicit averment, cannot be put in a straightjacket 
but will have to be gathered from the circumstance and manner in 
which it has been averred and conveyed, based on the facts of each 
case. The relevant portion of the said decision has already been 
extracted above. In the instant matter, the averments made in the 
documents referred to above, make it wholly clear that Sh. Neeraj 
[2025] 1 S.C.R. 
61
M/s Naresh Potteries v. M/s Aarti Industries and Another
Kumar possessed personal knowledge of the facts of the matter at 
hand and was well-equipped and duly authorised to initiate criminal 
proceedings against Respondent No.1. That beside the fact that it 
would always be open for the trial court to call upon the complainant 
for examination and cross-examination, if and when necessary, 
during the course of the trial. As such, a peremptory quashing of 
the complaint case by the High Court is completely unwarranted and 
that too on an incorrect factual basis.
34.	 Apart from that, this Court has repeatedly cautioned that the inherent 
powers under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. should be exercised sparingly 
and with great caution and further that inherent powers should not 
be used to interfere with the jurisdiction of the lower courts or to 
scuttle a fair investigation or prosecution. In light of the well-settled 
law on the subject, we do not find that the instant matter called for 
any interference by the High Court in exercise of its discretionary 
powers under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.
35.	 In that view of the matter, we are of the considered view that the High 
Court has passed the impugned judgment and order on a completely 
perfunctory and erroneous reasoning which depicts absence of careful 
consideration. That being the case, we are inclined to allow the appeal.
36.	 In the result, we pass the following order:
i.	
The present appeal is allowed;
ii.	
The final judgment and order dated 12th April 2023 passed by 
the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad in Criminal Miscellaneous Application No. 29906 of 
2022 is quashed and set aside; and
iii.	
The Complaint No. 701 of 2021 is restored to the file of the 
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Khurja, Bulandshahar to 
be heard and decided on its own merits.
37.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain