[2025] 4 S.C.R. 497 : 2025 INSC 433
Vinay Aggarwal  
v. 
The State of Haryana and Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1744 of 2025)
02 April 2025
[Sudhanshu Dhulia* and K. Vinod Chandran, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
In the instant case, the Single Judge of the High Court directed 
that the investigation be handed over to CBI. Whether the order 
of the Single Judge of the High Court is sustainable.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.482 – The appellant was 
made an accused in an FIR No.215/2022 registered u/ss.120B, 
177, 406, 420, 467, 468, 471, 506 of IPC – The complainant 
then filed a petition u/s.482 of the CrPC and sought transfer 
of investigation from the civil police of the State of Haryana 
to the CBI – The said petition was allowed by the High Court – 
Sustainability:
Held: Vague and bald allegations were made in the s.482 CrPC 
petition such as that the appellant was seen masquerading as 
an IB officer, and he was seen in the company of policemen of 
Haryana, etc. – The main ground taken by the complainant before 
the High Court was that the police officials are acquainted with the 
appellant and those officers may also be involved in the present 
case – These claims of the complainant are not substantiated – 
It is settled that CBI investigation should not be directed in a 
routine manner or just because some allegations have been made 
against the local police – Courts should direct for CBI investigation 
only in exceptional cases – In the instant case, the complainant 
has raised some allegations that high ranking police officials of 
Haryana Police are in connivance with the appellant, but such bald 
allegations are not sufficient to handover the case to CBI, without 
any kind of substantiation – After going through the records of the 
case, this Court is of the view that the present case is not the one 
where CBI investigation ought to have been directed by the High 
* Author
498
Court – Hence, the order of the Single Judge of the High Court 
cannot be sustained and is hereby set aside. [Paras 5, 7, 8, 9, 10]
Case Law Cited
State of W.B. v. Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights 
[2010] 2 SCR 979 : (2010) 3 SCC 571 – followed.
Minor Irrigation & Rural Engg. Services, U.P. v. Sahngoo Ram 
Arya (2002) 5 SCC 521 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Vague and bald allegations; CBI investigation; Civil Police of State; 
Routine manner; Local Police; Transfer of investigation; Handing 
over of case to CBI.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1744 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 17.05.2024 of the High Court 
of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in CRMM No. 2097 of 2023
With
Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 772 of 2024 and Criminal Appeal 
No. 1752 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Shoeb Alam, Sr. Adv., Ms. Parul Shukla, Ms. Shubhangi Pandey, 
Dev Sareen, Saday Mondol, Ms. Shubhangi Pandey, Saday Mondol, 
Naveen Kumar, Ms. Stuti Bisht, Nitesh Bhandari, Prabhat Kumar 
Rai, Aditya Goyal, Ujjawal Kumar Rai, Ms. Esha Kumar, Ms. Nidhi 
Singh, Utkarsh Chandra. 
Advs. for the Respondents:
Sudhanshu S Chaudhari, Sr. Adv., Vishal Malik, Karan Dewan, 
Miss Aanchal Jain, Samar Vijay Singh, Sumit Kumar Sharma, Rajat 
Sangwan, Ms. Sabarni Som, Shikhar Narwal, Ritesh Kumar Gupta, 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
499
Vinay Aggarwal v. The State of Haryana and Ors.
Aman Dev Sharma, Ms. Shreya Jain, Ms. Radhika Misra, Jagdish 
Chandra Solanki, Navin Kumar, Rajat Nair, Mukesh Kumar Maroria.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sudhanshu Dhulia, J. 
1.	
Permission to file SLP granted. Leave granted. 
2.	
The facts taken into account in this order are from Criminal Appeal 
arising out of SLP (Crl) No.8403/2024 by considering it to be the 
lead matter. The appellant before this Court was made an accused 
in an FIR No.215/2022 at P.S Sector 20, Panchkula (Haryana) under 
Section 120B, 177, 406, 420, 467, 468, 471, 506 of IPC. This FIR 
has been lodged on the basis of information given by complainant-
respondent no.3 (Jagbir Singh) where it has been alleged that the 
appellant impersonated himself as an Inspector General (IG) of 
Intelligence Bureau (IB) and threatened the complainant to transfer 
Rs.1,49,00,000 into the appellant’s account. As per this FIR, the 
complainant, who is in the business of pharmaceuticals, was coerced 
by the appellant to do business with the appellant’s associates and 
friends including one Dr. Komal Khanna (co-accused and appellant 
in criminal appeal arising out of Diary No.33284/2024) and money 
was extorted from the complainant’s firms by putting undue pressure 
on the complainant.
3.	
The FIR itself was filed on 29.10.2022. The complainant then filed a 
petition under Section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code (‘CrPC’) 
before the Punjab and Haryana High Court seeking transfer of 
investigation from the civil police of the State of Haryana to the 
Central Bureau of Investigation (for short ‘CBI’). This petition (under 
Section 482 CrPC) filed by respondent no.3, has been allowed by 
the High Court vide impugned order dated 17.05.2024 where the 
learned Single Judge directed that the investigation in the case be 
handed over to CBI. Aggrieved by the same, the appellant who is 
the main accused in the FIR is before us. 
4.	
Prior to the registration of the abovementioned FIR, on 06.01.2022, 
an earlier FIR being FIR No.01/2022 at P.S CID-Bharari, Shimla 
(Himachal Pradesh) was filed against appellant, which, the appellant 
500
alleges, was on the same issue and though the name of the present 
complainant is not there in the earlier FIR as complainant but, 
according to the present appellant, that too was initiated at the 
behest of the present complainant. The appellant argued that this 
FIR in Himachal Pradesh is on similar allegations alleging that the 
appellant, by impersonating himself as an IG (IB), had extorted lacs 
of rupees from industrialists including the complainant /respondent 
no.3. For the quashing of this FIR (No.01/2022), the appellant had 
filed a petition under Section 482 of CrPC before the High Court of 
Himachal Pradesh. The Himachal Pradesh High Court vide order 
dated 10.01.2025 has quashed FIR No.01/2022 against the appellant. 
In this order dated 10.01.2025, Himachal Pradesh High Court had 
observed that the FIR in Shimla was registered on the basis of some 
secret information and the High Court further made observations that 
the witnesses had made statements before police under Section 161 
CrPC in order to settle some disputes with the appellant, which are 
only civil in nature. Consequently, Himachal Pradesh High Court 
quashed the FIR since the filing of the FIR itself seemed to be an 
abuse of the process of law. 
5.	
We have gone through both the FIRs. We may not agree with the 
contentions of the appellant that the two FIRs, the one which has 
already been quashed and the second in which the investigation 
has now been handed over to the CBI vide the impugned order, are 
broadly similar in nature. They relate to different incidents and may 
have a different cause of action though some incidents narrated in 
one do relate to the other, but what is difficult for us to comprehend 
is that when the present FIR itself was filed on 22.10.2022 and the 
investigation itself was in its initial stage, then what was the burning 
hurry for the complainant to approach the High Court under Section 
482 CrPC as early as January 2023 seeking an investigation by CBI 
instead of local police. Vague and bald allegations were made in 
the Section 482 CrPC petition such as that the appellant was seen 
masquerading as an IB officer, and he was seen in the company of 
policemen of Haryana, etc. The main ground taken by the complainant 
before the High Court was that the police officials are acquainted 
with the appellant and those officers may also be involved in the 
present case. These claims of the complainant are not substantiated 
at all. Also, we may note that, in the same petition, the complainant 
had admitted that he knew the appellant since 2019 as they were 
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
501
Vinay Aggarwal v. The State of Haryana and Ors.
doing business together and even if we assume that the appellant 
was impersonating himself as an IPS officer, it is difficult to believe 
that complainant was not able to find out the truth till October 2022. 
Thus, in our considered view, the High Court ought to have been 
slow in interfering in this matter as this is not a case which should 
have been handed over to the CBI at the initial stage itself. 
6.	
While quashing the earlier FIR against the appellant, the Himachal 
Pradesh High Court had also observed that the complainant and 
other witnesses have used the FIR (No.01/2022) as a weapon to 
settle down the business disputes with the appellant. The appellant 
also contends that the money shown to be transferred in his account 
from the account of complainant’s firms is the money which was 
taken by complainant as a loan. However, we are not expressing 
any views on the merits of the case as all these aspects have to be 
seen during the investigation. 
7.	
We are only on the issue of handing over the investigation to the 
CBI. In State of W.B. v. Committee for Protection of Democratic 
Rights, (2010) 3 SCC 571, a Five-Judge Bench of this Court 
held that Constitutional Courts are fully empowered to direct for 
CBI investigation, and restrictions under the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment Act, 1946 do not apply to Constitutional Courts. 
However, this Court had also observed that CBI investigation should 
not be directed in a routine manner or just because some allegations 
have been made against the local police. Courts should direct for 
CBI investigation only in exceptional cases. This is what was said 
by this Court:
“70.…Insofar as the question of issuing a direction to CBI 
to conduct investigation in a case is concerned, although 
no inflexible guidelines can be laid down to decide whether 
or not such power should be exercised but time and again 
it has been reiterated that such an order is not to be 
passed as a matter of routine or merely because a party 
has levelled some allegations against the local police. 
This extraordinary power must be exercised sparingly, 
cautiously and in exceptional situations where it becomes 
necessary to provide credibility and instil confidence in 
investigations or where the incident may have national 
and international ramifications or where such an order may 
502
be necessary for doing complete justice and enforcing the 
fundamental rights. Otherwise CBI would be flooded with 
a large number of cases and with limited resources, may 
find it difficult to properly investigate even serious cases 
and in the process lose its credibility and purpose with 
unsatisfactory investigations.” 
8.	
The parameters laid down by this Court in Committee for Protection 
of Democratic Rights (Supra) are not fulfilled in the present 
case so as to exercise the extraordinary powers of directing CBI 
investigation. Moreover, in our opinion, High Court was perhaps 
moved by the assertions made by the complainant that local police 
officers who will do the investigation are of lesser ranks and that 
the matter involves some high ranking officials and thus, local police 
will not be able to investigate the matter properly. However, these 
allegations are vague and moreover, the Commissioner, Panchkula 
had constituted a three-member Special Investigation Team (SIT) 
under the Chairmanship of the Assistant Commissioner of Police 
(ACP) for the investigation. One should also take note that the 
allegations are not against some high ranking IPS officer but against 
a person who was allegedly impersonating himself as an IPS officer! 
The complainant has raised some allegations that high ranking police 
officials of Haryana Police are in connivance with the appellant, but 
such bald allegations are not sufficient to handover the case to CBI, 
without any kind of substantiation. 
9.	
The High Courts should direct for CBI investigation only in cases where 
material prima facie discloses something calling for an investigation 
by CBI and it should not be done in a routine manner or on the basis 
of some vague allegations. The “ifs” and “buts” without any definite 
conclusion are not sufficient to put an agency like CBI into motion 
[See: Minor Irrigation & Rural Engg. Services, U.P. v. Sahngoo 
Ram Arya, (2002) 5 SCC 521]. After going through the records of the 
case, we are of the view that the present case is not the one where 
CBI investigation ought to have been directed by the High Court.
10.	 Hence, the order of the learned Single Judge of the High Court dated 
17.05.2024 cannot be sustained and is hereby set aside. Accordingly, 
the appeal is allowed.
11.	 In light of the order in the main matter, the criminal appeal arising 
out of Diary No. 33284 of 2024 also stands disposed of.
[2025] 4 S.C.R. 
503
Vinay Aggarwal v. The State of Haryana and Ors.
12.	 While issuing notice in the present matter, this Court had passed 
an interim order dated 27.06.2024 staying the impugned order 
dated 17.05.2024. However, despite that, an FIR was registered 
on 09.07.2024 by CBI and the same has led to filing of a contempt 
case [Contempt Petition (C) No.772 of 2024] against CBI officials by 
the co-accused (Dr. Komal Khanna). In this contempt petition, Dr. 
Navdeep Singh Brar, IPS, Head of Branch, Special Crime Branch 
(CBI) had appeared before this Court and had given an unconditional 
apology for registration of FIR despite the stay order of this Court. 
In his affidavit, he has deposed that FIR dated 09.07.2024 was 
registered by mistake since CBI was not made aware of this Court’s 
interim order. He has further deposed that once CBI got to know 
about this Court’s order, all remedial steps were taken in the matter 
including the return of case papers to Haryana police. We accept the 
unconditional apology of Dr. Navdeep Singh Brar and do not wish 
to proceed any further in the contempt petition. Consequently, the 
notices given in the above Contempt Petition (C) No.772 of 2024 
are hereby discharged and the Contempt Petition stands disposed 
of in the above terms.
13.	 Before parting, we would also like to note that observations made 
by this Court in the present order are only limited to the issue of 
directing CBI investigation and these observations must not affect 
the investigation in any way which has to be done by the police in 
relation to FIR No.215/2022 at P.S Sector 20, Panchkula (Haryana) 
in a fair and just manner.
14.	 Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan