[2025] 3 S.C.R. 377 : 2025 INSC 299
Sharmila Velamur 
v. 
V. Sanjay and Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1037 of 2025)
03 March 2025
[Surya Kant,* Dipankar Datta and Ujjal Bhuyan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether ‘A’ having severe cognitive limitations is capable of making 
independent decisions; whether best interests and welfare of ‘A’, a 
US citizen would be served by permitting him to continue residing 
with Respondent No.4-father in India.
Headnotes†
Child and family welfare – Custody matter – Appellant-mother 
and respondent no. 4-father are US citizens, divorced in US – 
Appellant was granted permanent legal guardianship of their 
elder son ‘A’ who suffers from Ataxic Cerebral Palsy, by the 
US Court – However, while the guardianship proceedings 
were pending, the Respondent No.4 brought A to India 
without informing the Appellant – She filed writ of habeas 
corpus in High Court alleging illegal detention of A – High 
Court very briefly interacted with A and held that he was 
consensually living with Respondent No.4 in India, dismissed 
the petition – Supreme Court doubting the child's capacity to 
make independent decisions, ordered a medical assessment 
at NIMHANS, Bengaluru:
Held: NIMHANS, Bengaluru in its Comprehensive Assessment 
Report held that owing to ‘A’ cognitive and physical limitations, he 
does not possess the capacity to make well-informed, independent 
decisions, for his own benefit, on complex subject matter, such as 
long-term residence – This is also concurred by the report of the 
Evaluation Committee constituted by the Idaho Department of Health 
and Welfare (West Hub Developmental Disabilities Program) – 
Thus, as ‘A’ was assessed to possess the cognitive abilities of an 
8 to 10-year-old child, the reasoning assigned by the High Court, 
* Author
378
of him consenually living in India is seriously erroneous – ‘A’ cannot 
make independent, legally-binding decisions on his own – High 
Court erred in coming to a finding on ‘A’s alleged illegal detention 
solely based on his perceived ‘independent’ decision to reside in 
India with Respondent No. 4 – Impugned judgment set aside – ‘A’ 
to be under the sole custody of the Appellant – Further directions 
issued. [Paras 21, 23, 41]
Expert Opinion – Expert’s report to be given due credence 
unless strong reasons to disbelieve it – Parties are US citizens, 
divorced in US – Appellant-mother was granted permanent legal 
guardianship of their elder son ‘A’ (22 years old) with severe 
cognitive limitations – Appellant filed writ of habeas corpus 
in High Court alleging his illegal detention by the Respondent 
No.4-father – High Court very briefly interacted with ‘A’ and 
held that he was consensually living with his father in India, 
dismissed the petition – It did not consider the report of the 
Evaluation Committee constituted by the Idaho Department 
of Health and Welfare (West Hub Developmental Disabilities 
Program) consisting of a Psychologist, a Physician and a 
Social Worker, to decide whether ‘A’ was living consensually 
in India:
Held: Even though Courts are well within their rights to come 
to a finding distinct from an expert’s report, the expert’s opinion 
cannot be discarded, as a whole without any reason – The dispute 
before the High Court concerned the sensitive and complex issue 
of alleged illegal detention of a person with severe cognitive 
limitations, it ought to have considered and given due credence 
to the Evaluation Committee’s report which had held that ‘A’ does 
not possess the capacity to make well-informed, independent 
decisions, for his own benefit, on complex subject matter, such as 
long-term residence – If the High Court had any doubt as to the 
reliability of the report and its conclusions, it ought to have ordered 
an enquiry through a reputable medical institution – Dismissing all 
aspects of scientific assessment in a highly specialized and niche 
area of medicine was misconceived and ill-founded – In the event 
there is any confusion or doubt regarding a person’s capacity and 
ability to make independent decisions and if there is a definitive 
opinion on disability endorsed by a specialist, domain expert, or 
a doctor, the Court should give due credence to that opinion – If 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
379
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
the expert’s report concludes that the mental or physical age of 
the person concerned is well below the age of majority, there can 
be no inference of any ‘implied’ or ‘express’ consent to any act 
which might have a substantive impact on the consenting person – 
Unless there are strong reasons to disbelieve an expert’s report 
to this effect, the Courts must be overly-cautious in coming to a 
finding contrary thereto. [Paras 20, 22]
Child and family welfare – Custody matters – Child’s best 
interest and welfare – Determination – Doctrine of parens 
patriae – Parties are US citizens – Issue of custody of their 
elder son ‘A’ suffering from Ataxic Cerebral Palsy – Whether 
A’s best interests and welfare would be served by permitting 
him to continue residing with Respondent No.4-father in India:
Held: ‘A’, his parents and his younger brother, have resided in the 
US for two decades and are all US citizens – Having been born 
and brought up in the US, they are accustomed to the culture, 
the activities, the language and the schooling there – They know 
no other way of life and have their roots in the US – Regardless 
of these commonalities, the brothers share certain unique 
characteristics which helps them understand, relate to, and lean 
on each other – Also, A has completed most of his schooling in 
the US; he has access to long-term specialized welfare services 
and curriculums; he has a peer group; an established routine; 
and places to regularly attend for socialization – He is familiar 
with the language and lifestyle in the US – Also, ‘A’ desires to 
be in the company of his younger brother, from whom he has 
been separated for far too long – It cannot be said that ‘A’ has 
given up his roots in the US and has developed new roots in 
India, due to which he should not be displaced – In the facts and 
surrounding circumstances, it is in A’s best interests and welfare 
to return to the US, where he can complete his schooling and 
reside with his younger brother, under the appellant’s guardianship. 
[Paras 35, 38, 39]
Child and family welfare – Custody of child – Best interest of 
child – Comity of courts – Principle of:
Held: The principle of comity of courts and a pre-existing order 
of a Foreign Court must yield to the best interests of the child, 
especially when the Court has decided to conduct an elaborate 
380
enquiry in this regard – Court to take into account all the attending 
circumstances and the totality of the situation to consider the 
interests of the child. [Paras 31, 32]
Case Law Cited
Girish v. Radhamony K. (2009) 16 SCC 360; Suchita Srivastava 
v. Chandigarh Admn. [2009] 13 SCR 989 : (2009) 9 SCC 1 – 
distinguished.
Shafin Jahan v. Asokan K.M. [2018] 4 SCR 955 : (2018) 16 SCC 
368; Sheoli Hati v. Somnath Das [2019] 9 SCR 212 : (2019) 7 SCC 
490; Vivek Singh v. Romani Singh [2017] 2 SCR 312 : (2017) 3 
SCC 231; Nithya Anand Raghavan v. State (NCT of Delhi) [2017] 
7 SCR 281 : (2017) 8 SCC 454; Elizabeth Dinshaw v. Arvand M. 
Dinshaw [1987] 1 SCR 175 : (1987) 1 SCC 42; Dhanwanti Joshi 
v. Madhav Unde [1997] Supp. 5 SCR 30 : (1998) 1 SCC 112; 
Rohith Thammana Gowda v. State of Karnataka [2022] 4 SCR 
784 : 2022 SCC OnLine SC 937; V. Ravi Chandran (Dr.) (2) v. 
Union of India [2009] 13 SCR 1022 : (2010) 1 SCC 174; Gaurav 
Nagpal v. Sumedha Nagpal [2008] 16 SCR 396 : (2009) 1 SCC 
42 – referred to.
List of Keywords
Custody; US citizens; Ataxic cerebral palsy; Severe cognitive 
limitations; Cognitive abilities of an 8 to 10-year-old child; Capacity to 
make independent decisions; Independent, legally-binding decisions; 
Alleged illegal detention; Habeas corpus; Best interest and welfare 
of the child; Permanent legal guardianship; Principle of comity of 
courts; Expert opinion/report; NIMHANS Bengaluru; Evaluation 
Committee; Joint custody; Cognitive capacity; Doctrine of parens 
patriae; Guardianship; Severe disability; Autism spectrum disorder.
Case Arising From
Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction/Inherent Jurisdiction: Criminal Appeal 
No. 1037 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 09.08.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras in HCP No. 886 of 2024
With
Contempt Petition (C) No. 9 of 2025
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
381
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Ms. V. Mohana, Sr. Adv., Ashim Sood, Mayank Pandey, Anish Gopi, 
Velpula Audityaa, Ms. Bhavya Pandey, Ekansh Gupta, Ashish 
Kumar Pandey, Nirmal Prasad, Ribhav Pande, Arun.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Ms. Liz Mathew, Sr. Adv., Aakash Nandolia, Sabarish Subramanian, 
Lzafeer Ahmad B. F., Sachin Dubey, Dheeraj Nair, Akhil Anand, 
Ms. Ridhima Sharma.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Surya Kant, J.
Leave granted. 
2.	
The controversy in this case revolves around the custody of Aadith 
Ramadorai, a twenty-two-year-old citizen of the United States of 
America (US) who has been diagnosed with Ataxic Cerebral Palsy. 
This tussle for custody has been elicited by Aadith Ramadorai’s 
parents—the Appellant and Respondent No. 4—both of whom are 
also US citizens. 
A.	
Facts
3.	
It is necessary to understand the factual milieu surrounding the 
dispute before delving into the consequential legal issues.
3.1	 To clarify the relationship between the parties, as previously 
elucidated, the Appellant and Respondent No. 4 are Aadith 
Ramadorai’s mother and father, respectively. Respondent No. 
1 is the Appellant’s brother, whereas Respondent Nos. 5 and 
6 are Respondent No. 4’s parents. 
3.2	 The Appellant and Respondent No. 4 got married in Chennai, 
India on 09.07.2001, as per Hindu rites and customs. 
Subsequently, they began residing together in Idaho, US and 
acquired US citizenship in due course of time. They had two 
sons—Aadith Ramadorai (Aadith), who was born on 06.06.2003, 
382
and Arjun Ramadorai (Arjun), who was born on 13.03.2005—
from the wedlock. Both the children are US citizens by virtue 
of their birth and their parents’ citizenship. These children were 
born with intellectual and developmental disabilities. Aadith has 
Ataxic Cerebral Palsy, while Arjun has Autism Spectrum Disorder. 
3.3	 During their marriage, certain irreconcilable differences arose 
between the Appellant and Respondent No. 4, prompting them 
to dissolve their marriage by mutual consent through an order 
dated 12.09.2007, passed by the District Court of the Fourth 
Judicial District, State of Idaho, US (Idaho Court). While 
dissolving the marriage, the Idaho Court awarded joint legal 
and physical custody of the sons, as they were minors at the 
time. The Idaho Court established the terms of joint custody 
as follows: (i) Respondent No. 4 would have physical custody 
of the sons every week from 8:00 am on Friday to 8:00 am on 
Monday; and (ii) the Appellant would have physical custody of 
the sons every week from 8:00 am on Monday to 8:00 am on 
Friday. The Idaho Court divided all holidays equally amongst 
the parents and further directed them to not disparage each 
other in the midst of their sons, teachers, care providers, and 
medical providers. Additionally, neither party was directed to 
pay child support to the other. Lastly, in furtherance of these 
directions, the Idaho Court vide Clause 13 of the Supplemental 
Custody Order expounded that, “Neither parent shall move the 
children’s residence to a place which will make the ordered 
custody and visitation schedule impractical or significantly 
more difficult or expensive without prior written consent 
of the other parent or an order of the court.”
3.4	 Thereafter, in June 2022, following a visit in terms of the Idaho 
Court’s custody arrangement, Respondent No. 4 brought Arjun 
back to the Appellant’s home, whereas Aadith continued to reside 
with Respondent No. 4. It is pertinent to note that by this time, 
Aadith had already attained majority. This led the Appellant to file 
a Guardianship Application before the Idaho Court on 30.06.2022, 
seeking full and permanent legal guardianship over Aadith. In 
response thereto, Respondent No. 4 filed a Counter-Petition 
before the Idaho Court on 17.01.2023, contending that Aadith was 
sufficiently capable and did not require a permanent guardian.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
383
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
3.5	 In due course, during a preliminary hearing on 04.01.2023 
before the Idaho Court, the parties’ attorneys laid down 
mutual terms for them to adhere to until the conclusion of the 
proceedings. These terms included: (i) meeting with the Health 
and Welfare Committee within 45 days; (ii) sharing Aadith’s 
address, phone number, and email address with the Appellant; 
(iii) allowing regular in-person contact between the Appellant 
and Aadith, subject to his comfort level; and (iv) providing 
advance notice and written itineraries for any foreign travel 
arrangements involving Aadith, which would be discussed by 
the parents jointly. 
3.6	 As per the terms mentioned above, the Appellant and Aadith were 
scheduled to be interviewed on 17.05.2023 by the Evaluation 
Committee of the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare 
(West Hub Developmental Disabilities Program) (Evaluation 
Committee). The Evaluation Committee’s findings revealed that 
Respondent No. 4 and Aadith refused to attend the interview/
meeting. A report based on the Evaluation Committee’s 
findings was sent to the parties and the authorities. Soon after, 
Respondent No. 4 brought Aadith for his in-person interview 
with the Evaluation Committee. Accordingly, an addendum dated 
25.10.2023 was issued, marking their presence, and concluding 
that Aadith required guardianship. 
3.7	 In the interregnum, mediation sessions were scheduled to be 
held between the parties. However, during this period, the 
Appellant discovered that Respondent No. 4 and Aadith had 
left the US to visit Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 in Chennai, India. 
This rendered the Appellant entirely unaware of their travel and 
return itinerary. Therefore, she was unable to maintain regular 
contact with her son. 
3.8	 While these developments were materialising, parallelly, the 
Idaho Court appointed the Appellant as Aadith’s temporary 
guardian on 10.01.2024. Against this backdrop, investigations 
conducted by the US Federal Authorities and the Idaho District 
Authorities revealed that during the pendency of the proceedings, 
Respondent No. 4 obtained Aadith’s passport and left the US 
on 31.12.2023. On arriving in India, they began residing in 
Chennai with Respondent Nos. 5 and 6. 
384
3.9	 By virtue of this, the Appellant, on 31.01.2024, filed an online 
police complaint with Respondent No. 2. She then authorized 
her brother, Respondent No. 1, to act on her behalf to retrieve 
custody of Aadith. Thereupon, on 05.02.2024, the Appellant 
lodged a complaint with the NRI Cell in Chennai. In furtherance 
thereto, the Police Authorities in Chennai were able to retrieve 
Aadith’s passport number, along with the last known address 
and contact details of Respondent Nos. 5 and 6. However, 
Aadith and Respondent Nos. 4 to 6 remained untraceable.
3.10	Concurrently, in the guardianship proceedings pending before 
the Idaho Court, an Emergency Order came to be passed on 
22.02.2024, directing Aadith to return to Boise, Idaho within 72 
hours. When this direction was not followed, the Idaho Court 
proceeded to decide the Guardianship Application in favour of 
the Appellant, consequently appointing her as Aadith’s full and 
permanent guardian on 09.04.2024. This order was passed after 
duly hearing parties’ testimonies; and after reviewing the report 
dated 17.05.2023 and addendum dated 25.10.2023 issued by 
the Evaluation Committee.
3.11	Despite the decree passed by the Idaho Court, Aadith’s 
whereabouts remained unknown to the Appellant. This prompted 
the Appellant to file H.C.P. No. 886/2024 before the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras (High Court) through Respondent 
No. 1, inter alia praying for the issuance of a Writ of Habeas 
Corpus directing Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 to retrieve custody 
of Aadith from Respondent Nos. 4 to 6 and to handover his 
person to Respondent No. 1. 
3.12	During the proceedings, the High Court interacted with Aadith 
and posed multiple questions to him. Based on the answers 
tendered, the High Court, vide its judgment dated 09.08.2024, 
primarily determined that there was no illegal detention because: 
(i) Aadith was capable of understanding the questions posed 
by the High Court; and (ii) He was happy and willing to reside 
in Chennai with his father and his paternal grandparents 
(Impugned Judgement). On 09.09.2024, the US Consulate 
General, Chennai revoked Aadith’s passport. 
3.13	Thus, aggrieved by the High Court’s decision, the Appellant 
preferred the instant appeal.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
385
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
3.14	This Court, in the course of this appeal, passed the order dated 
16.12.2024, issuing certain interim directions: (i) Respondent 
No. 4 was directed to facilitate video calls between the Appellant 
and Aadith in the evening between 7:00 pm and 9:00 pm IST. 
The call duration was to be for a maximum of 30 minutes; (ii) 
Upon the Appellant’s arrival in India, Respondent No. 4 was 
directed to handover temporary custody of Aadith to her; (iii) 
While Aadith was under the temporary custody of the Appellant, 
she and Respondent No. 4 would ensure that he gets his 
medical treatment regularly and preferably, in adherence with 
the recommendations of specialists in the US; (iv) Respondent 
No. 4 was permitted to contact Aadith daily while he was under 
the temporary custody of the Appellant; and (v) The Appellant 
and Respondent No. 4 were directed to consult the best doctors 
in Chennai for continued treatment of Aadith. 
3.15	In the meantime, Aadith, in a purported exercise of his own free 
will, filed two interlocutory applications in the instant appeal. 
They are I.A. No. 301117/2024 and I.A. No. 301051/2024, 
seeking to be impleaded in the matter and seeking directions 
to keep the order dated 16.12.2024 in abeyance till 07.01.2025, 
respectively. These applications were accompanied by signed 
affidavits, stating that Aadith was fully conversant with the facts 
and circumstances of the case and that the applications had 
been prepared in consonance with his instructions. 
3.16	Simultaneously, being dissatisfied by Respondent No. 4’s non-
compliance with the order dated 16.12.2024, the Appellant 
preferred the captioned Contempt Petition. She sought to allege 
that despite the clear instructions enumerated in the order 
dated 16.12.2024, the Appellant was not allowed to interact 
with Aadith on video call. Further, upon her arrival in Chennai, 
Respondent No. 4 refused to hand over temporary custody of 
Aadith. In fact, he ceased all communication with her. When the 
Appellant arrived at their flat on 24.12.2024, she was permitted 
to interact with Aadith for roughly 30 minutes, forcing her to cut 
short her time with her son and leave the flat without obtaining 
temporary custody of Aadith. 
3.17	Respondent No. 4 brought Aadith for medical assessment to the 
Institute of Mental Health, Kilpauk in Chennai on 25.11.2024. 
386
On Respondent No. 4’s request, Aadith was examined and an 
Observation Report was prepared, which recorded as follows: 
“Mr. Aadith Rajson Ramadorai 21 years, male was 
registered in the Institute of Mental Health, Chennai  – 
10 on 25.11.2024. He was subsequently examined 
on 29.11.2024, 02.12.2024 and 09.12.2024 at his 
request and the request of his father.
Detailed history was obtained from his father. 
Physical examination, mental status examination 
and psychological assessment were done. He has a 
history of developmental delay since childhood. 
On psychometry, he has an Intelligence quotient 
(IQ) of 54, which is suggestive of mild intellectual 
disability (50% disability).
He is able to do simple work on instructions. He is 
able to travel to familiar places alone. He is capable 
of living with the assistance of his family members. 
He will require support for making major decisions 
in life like property management.”
3.18	Subsequently, this Court, vide order dated 08.01.2025, directed 
that Aadith will reside with his younger brother, Arjun, and 
the Appellant in Bengaluru, during the pendency of these 
proceedings. Respondent No. 4 was permitted to visit and 
interact with his sons for 3 hours every day. Further, the Appellant 
and Respondent No. 4 were directed to take the sons for 
medical assessment to the National Institute of Mental Health 
and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, arguably one of 
the best institutes in the country. The doctors at NIMHANS, 
Bengaluru were requested to give their expert opinion as to 
whether Aadith is in a position to make independent decisions. 
The report so prepared was ordered to be submitted before 
this Court in a sealed cover. 
3.19	It seems that the parties substantially complied with the order 
dated 08.01.2025, particularly the directions concerning custody, 
as Aadith has been residing with his younger brother and the 
Appellant in Bengaluru ever since. In continued compliance 
with the above order, Aadith and his brother were brought to 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
387
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
NIMHANS, Bengaluru on 13.01.2025 by their parents. They 
were duly admitted as in-patients on 14.01.2025. 
3.20	From 17.01.2025 to 29.01.2025, Aadith was examined by the 
Department of Clinical Psychology at NIMHANS, Bengaluru. He 
was administered 7 tests namely, the Vineland Social Maturity 
Scale (VSMS), the Vineland Adaptive Behaviour Skills – 3 
(VABS), the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale – IV India Edition, 
the Binet Kamat Test of Intelligence (BKT), the Comprehension 
Subtest from Malin’s Intelligence Scale for Indian Children 
(MISIC), the Theory of Mind/False Belief Tests (Anne and Sally 
Test; Matchbox Test), and the Delayed Discounting Task. The 
test findings are reproduced below:
“SOCIAL AND DAILY ADAPTIVE FUNCTIONS
Vineland Social Maturity Scale (VSMS)
The VSMS was administered to assess his socio-
adaptive functioning. The patient’s social age 
was found to be 7 years, which corresponds to 
an SQ of 47, which suggests Moderate level of 
disability in current socio-adaptive functioning, 
corresponding to 75% disability. As Mr. Aadith has 
motor disabilities and that would have affected his 
overall VSMS score, an attempt was made to adjust 
the score by removing the scores related to motor 
components from VSMS. This showed his score as 53 
(Impairment-adjusted SQ); which indicated Moderate 
disability in socio-adaptive functioning according to 
the VSMS score classification of revised Gazette of 
India notification. However, the gazette notification 
was mainly for intact VSMS score (i.e. not for 
Impairment-adjusted SQ). Hence, the interpretation 
of Impairment-Adjusted SQ to be done with caution. 
It should be noted that VSMS is standardized in 
India several decades ago and might not adequately 
reflect his current level of socio-adaptive functioning, 
for mainly 2 reasons. One the patient is born and 
brought up in the US, and that the standardization 
was done long time ago. However, the limitations 
388
if has an influence would have caused their score 
to inflate, rather than bring down. Despite these 
limitations, his scores still showed that he has 
Moderate level of disability in social and adaptive 
functioning.
Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale – 3 (VABS – 3) 
– Comprehensive Form
The VABS-3 test was administered to assess his 
adaptive behavior. The patient obtained a standard 
score of 38 on the Communication domain, and 47 
on the domain of Daily Living Skills, both suggestive 
of deficits of ‘Moderately low’ level in these domains. 
His ability on the domain of socialization showed 
significant disability as well as a sub-domain scatter, 
where his coping skills related to social domain was 
significantly lower compared to the other domains 
of socialization such as interpersonal relationships, 
play and leisure. He obtained a total sum of 
domain standard scores of 100 corresponding 
to an Adaptive Behavior Composite (ABC) of 34, 
suggestive of ‘Low’ level of Adaptive Behavior 
on the current assessment.
INTELLIGENCE TESTS:
Binet Kamat Test of Intelligence (BKT)
On BKT, the patient’s basal age and terminal age 
were found to be 6 years and 14 years respectively. 
His prorated mental age obtained is 10 years. His 
prorated intelligence quotient (IQ) is 63, indicating 
Mild level of disability in intellectual functioning. 
Similar to VSMS, BKT has been standardized in Indian 
Population, several decades ago and intelligence 
value obtained is through ratio method. Considering 
this, the obtained IQ can be said as an inflated value, 
given that Mr. Aadith has been born and bought up in 
USA. Despite this, he has obtained a prorated IQ 
of 63, which is in the Mild Intellectual Disability 
range.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
389
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale IVINDIA Edition 
(WAIS-4INDIA)
On WAIS-4INDIA, his Verbal Comprehension Index 
Score was calculated to be 75. The perceptual 
Reasoning Index was 53, the Working Memory Index 
(WMI) was calculated to be 47, and the Processing 
Speed Index was 45. This yields a full-scale IQ 
(FSIQ) of 53. This score falls in the range of 
Mild Intellectual Disability. WAIS-4INDIA as the 
name implies is standardized for Indian population. 
However, given the norms differences between Indian 
and US population, the obtained scores by Mr. Aadith 
if referred to Indian norms will yield a higher score, 
compared to US norms. It should be noted that 
despite this, his score is in the Mild Intellectual 
Disability range.
Malin’s Intelligence Scale for Indian Children 
(MISIC) – Comprehension Subtest
On the MISIC subtest of Comprehension, the 
patient obtained a raw score of 05, corresponding 
to a test quotient of 62, indicating Mild levels 
of disability in comprehension. Again, relatively 
similar to in VSMS and WAIS-4INDIA, the MISIC is for 
children up to the age of 16 years and the norms 
are for Indian children. Despite this his score is in 
the disability range.
PERSPECTIVE TAKING and DECISION MAKING:
Theory of Mind/False-Belief Tests
Theory of mind was tested using Anne and Sally test 
False-Belief – Matchbox test. 
The patient performed poorly on both Anne and 
Sally and Matchbox tests, where he could not 
attribute mental states (beliefs, intents) to others. 
That is, on test, he spontaneously, did not view 
that the others have their own thoughts/beliefs 
independent of himself.
390
Delay Discounting Task:
Delay Discounting Task primarily assesses decision 
making and impulsivity. In this task Mr. Aadith 
performed poorly in the second trail itself, 
where he preferred significantly smaller reward – 
immediately, forgoing significantly larger reward – 
at a delay of one month. For example, when 
presented with the patient a hypothetical scenario 
of choosing between 10 INR now or 100 INR after 
a month, he said 100 INR after a month. However, 
with the follow-up questions of choosing 20 INR now 
or 100 INR after a month, he answered 20 INR now. 
He could not answer the subsequent questions and 
had difficulty understanding the value of money.
COMMENTS ABOUT INDEPENDENT DECISION 
MAKING:
•  Decision Making for Daily Living Activities:
As observed on VABS-3 and VSMS, the patient 
is capable of carrying out basic daily activities, 
such as brushing his teeth with an electric 
toothbrush, adjusting water to the appropriate 
temperature for bathing, and selecting suitable 
clothing based on the weather. He can also spread 
sauces or jam using a table knife, change clothes 
with large buttons, put on shoes without laces, 
and use certain kitchen appliances, such as bread 
toaster and a microwave oven, under supervision.  
However, he struggles with independent self-care 
when left alone and has difficulty performing 
more complex tasks. He faces challenges using a 
manual toothbrush, handling a knife to cut fruits, 
and independently seeking medical attention as 
needed. Additionally, he would have difficulty 
operating household appliances safely, such as 
a vacuum cleaner, iron, or power tools.
While he is able to tell time using the digital watch, he 
struggles with reading an analog clock. Furthermore, 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
391
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
he has difficulty exercising discretion and 
judgment in higher-level activities, such as 
traveling alone to unfamiliar places or setting and 
achieving long-term goals that require planning 
over two years or more.
Impression: Independent Decision-making ability 
is adequate for basic activities but inadequate for 
higher-level activities.
•  Decision Making for Financial Safety:
When asked to make payments or explicit purchases, 
the patient shows responsibility with a small amount of 
money. He is careful about this and uses it as directed. 
However, he has not able to make independent 
decisions with regard to monetary aspects in 
relatively higher values.
He has also been observed to have difficulty 
differentiating currency values and providing the 
correct change. When asked which currency had a 
higher value, 100 INR or 500 INR, he chose 100 INR. 
The same error was observed when questioned 
about US currency. Additionally, he struggled with 
basic mathematics, such as addition and subtraction. 
For instance, when given a scenario where 50 INR 
was spent on ice cream, and 100 INR was handed to 
the shopkeeper, he could not determine the correct 
return amount. He also had difficulties performing 
similar other simple, mental calculations of verbal in 
nature, involving two-digit numbers about subtraction, 
multiplication, and division.
Financial safety and related aspects were to have 
significant deficits.
Impression: He cannot make independent 
decision in financial aspects.
•  Decision Making for Socialization:
On VABS-3, it was observed that the patient can 
recognize emotions and express his feelings through 
392
words. He shares toys and possessions voluntarily 
without being prompted and takes turns naturally 
while playing games or sports. Additionally, he can 
join a group when verbal and nonverbal cues indicate 
he is welcome and adjusts his behaviour to avoid 
disturbing others nearby.
However, he struggles with playing complex games 
that involve rules and has difficulty imitating intricate 
actions hours after observing them, such as shaving, 
vacuuming, or hammering nails. He also faces 
challenges in modulating his speech appropriately in 
terms of loudness, speed, and excitement to match 
the conversation. Engaging in discussions on topics 
that do not interest him is difficult, as is initiating 
conversations by discussing subjects relevant to 
others. He also struggles to pick up on indirect cues 
or hints in conversations and has difficulty providing 
additional explanations to ensure his message is 
understood.
Furthermore, he would have difficulty planning 
activities that require coordinating multiple elements, 
such as organizing a birthday party or a group 
outing. He also lacks the ability to navigate 
social situations safely, such as going out with 
peers in the evening without supervision, social 
media, and identifying harmful relationships or 
situations. This includes difficulty avoiding or 
exiting situations where he might be bullied, 
coerced into illegal activities, or taken advantage 
of sexually or financially.
Impression: Independent decision making in 
simple social and close group/family/home 
aspects is adequate, but anything beyond is 
inadequate.
•  Decision Making for Occupation:
It was observed that the patient can sometimes 
complete routine household tasks when instructed, 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
393
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
use basic tools or utensils, and draw simple 
shapes and objects with pencils or crayons.
However, he would have difficulty engaging 
in small remunerative work, such as making 
simple garments, performing minor repairs, taking 
the initiative in occasional tasks like housework, or 
assisting in child care. Additionally, he would struggle 
with creative activities, including making useful items, 
raising pets, writing simple stories or poems, or 
creating basic paintings.
He also faces challenges in performing responsible 
routine chores appropriate for his age, such as 
assisting with household tasks, caring for a 
garden, cleaning a car, washing windows, setting 
the table, or fetching water. Furthermore, as 
observed on VABS-3, he would have difficulty 
maintaining a job for at least one year, even if it 
required only 10 hours of work per week. 
Impression: Decision-making in very basic 
occupational skills is adequate and beyond that 
it is inadequate.
OVERALL IMPRESSION:
Considering his intellectual disability, which 
is at the Mild disability level, and all the other 
findings mentioned above as well as considering 
his spontaneous verbalizations mentioned 
above; we are of the opinion that Mr. Aadith is 
functioning at the level of about 8 to 10 years 
old child in general. Given this, any complex 
decisions that exceeds the capacity of an 8-to 
10-year-old, he would not be able to make 
informed decisions by himself; and even if he 
makes, those decisions would be made without 
considering all the options and repercussions 
that come with decision making.”
3.21	During his stay at NIMHANS, Bengaluru, on 22.01.2025, the 
Department of Speech Pathology and Audiology assessed 
394
Aadith’s speaking abilities. Their findings, as enumerated in 
the handwritten report, are as follows: 
“Phonology:
	• Omission of [‘l’] in initial, medial, and final position.
	• Substitution of [‘l’] with [‘r’] in initial, medial, and 
final position.
	• Substitution of [‘t’] with [‘s’] in initial, medial, and 
final position.
Morphosyntax:
	• He uses simple, compound sentence structure in 
sentences and in conversation.
	• He consistently uses morphological markers such 
as bound morpheme, inflectional morpheme, free 
morphemes.
	• He uses suffix, prefix to change tense.
	• He uses singular and plurals in sentences and in 
conversation.
	• He compares and contrasts.
	• He uses verbs to nouns in conversation and 
sentences.
	• He uses adjectives to describe objects.
	• He uses negations in the form of ‘No’.
	• He can formulate questions (what, who, where).
	• He uses conjunction in conversations, sentences.
	• He produces errors in free sentences.
	• He uses time formation such as past tense, future 
tense.
	• He uses singular possessions and plural 
possessions in conversation and in sentences.
	• He uses adverbs (here, there).
	• He uses affixes (ing format to describe).
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
395
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
Semantics:
	• He understands abstract words.
	• He understands meaning of words based on 
context and interprets multiple meanings.
	• He understands idiomatic expression.
	• He understands sentence structure to interpret.
	• He can understand simple meaning from a story but 
has difficulty in understanding complex meanings.
	• He can understand jokes and reacts to it.
	• He has difficulty in understanding figurative 
language.
	• He has difficulty in understanding inference from 
a complex scenario when given.
	• He had difficulty in understanding complex false 
beliefs and assumptions.
	• He has difficulty in understanding complex 
synonyms, antonyms.
	• He can answer to simple ‘wh’ questions but has 
difficulty in answering complex ‘wh’ questions.
Intelligibility: AYJNIHH rating scale level 02.
Impression: Inadequate speech and language and 
developmental dysarthria 2° IDD & CP.
Advice:
	• Speech and language intervention.
	• Attend DT session in department. 
	• Counselling.
	• Follow up during next visit to NIMHANS on Mon/
Tue/Wed/Fri @ 8:30 am.”
3.22	On 03.02.2025, the Department of Clinical Psychology 
administered the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) to Aadith, 
396
to assess his understanding of interpersonal relationships. The 
findings of this test are reproduced below: 
“Behavioural Observations: 
The patient came to the interview willingly. His 
attention could be aroused and sustained. Patient 
was cooperative and interested in the testing 
throughout the session. He was able to comprehend 
the instructions adequately. 
Summary of Test Findings: 
The patient’s stories were reasonably imaginative 
content. Although he described what was given in 
the pictures he was able to attribute thoughts and 
feelings to the characters. The predominant theme 
that emerged from the stories was one of a family unit 
enjoying various activities together such as eating, 
going for a hike, planning a feast in others’ home 
or inviting guests over. The stories also indicated 
how one has to learn and behave during various 
interpersonal conflicts. He showed good problem 
solving skills such as adequate communication with 
others during conflicts, rethinking one’s actions and 
consequences.”
3.23	Thereafter, on 05.02.2025, the Department of Psychiatric 
Social Work prepared the Psychosocial Assessment Report 
after studying parameters such as Aadith’s living arrangements 
throughout the years, his education, training, occupation, and 
future plans. Further, exhaustive interviews were conducted with 
the Appellant and Respondent No. 4, individually, to determine 
their perspectives on parenting, expectations from Aadith, plans 
for his future, and opinions about the other parent. The findings 
are extracted as follows: 
“Upbringing and living arrangements: From birth 
to 2 years of age, the client lived with his parents in 
Boise City, Idaho, U.S., till their separation in 2005. 
From 2005 to 2007, as per the temporary orders by 
the Idaho court, the client and his younger brother 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
397
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
stayed with their father for one whole week in a 
month, while the remaining 3 weeks were spent with 
their mother. After the parents’ divorce in 2007, the 
living arrangement changed; the children would stay 
with their mother from Monday to Thursday, and their 
father from Friday to Sunday, and both houses were 
5 to 7 miles apart. The vacations were equally spent 
with both parents separately, taking into consideration 
the father’s nature of the job. This practice continued 
till 2017-2018, after which the mother requested an 
alternative week arrangement and thus, from 2018 
to 2021, the client and his younger brother stayed 
with each parent on alternate weeks of the month. 
During their stay with the father, he took care of 
all the needs of the children by himself including 
supervision, feeding and self-care, while the mother 
had assistance with the same. The mother reported 
that both children were cared for by the father, and 
she didn’t notice any behavioural changes in the client 
during their stay with the father. Up to 2019, both 
parents had equal joint custody, physical and 
legal custody of the client. In 2019, Idaho court 
granted the mother the legal custody of both 
children while both parents shared the physical 
custody till 2021 when the client became an adult. 
The client and his younger brother stayed with 
their mother from 202l to 2022, when the father 
returned to India to care for his parents, which 
the mother was also aware of. The father came 
back to the U.S. in 2022 to meet the client and his 
brother; the client lived with his father independently 
from 2022 to 2024 in the U.S. In January 2024, the 
client came to India with his father to stay with his 
grandparents and lived here since then. 
Education: The client started schooling at the age 
of 5 years. From the beginning, he followed the 
Individual Education Plan (IEP). The client attended 
an integrated school with special schooling and 
standard classes. From middle school onwards, 
398
the client attended classes under the supervision 
of a special educator. He completed his 12th class 
and diploma in 2022 instead of 2021 as his mother 
decided to extend the training for individual living skill 
training and job skill training. 
Training attended: The client attended the Infant-
Toddler Programme for 3 years (birth to 3 years 
of age), followed by training in the Head Start 
programme till 5 years of age. These programmes 
were provided mainly to address the client’s 
developmental delay and physical difficulties. In 
addition to the special training and physical therapy, 
speech therapy, and occupation therapy from 
his school, the client also attended professional 
handwriting training at home (Handwriting without 
Tears programme) for 3 years during elementary 
schooling, physical exercise in parks and once a 
week half-day social skill training through exposure 
to social gatherings from 2017 onwards, which his 
mother supervised. During the client’s stay with his 
father, the client was informally trained by his father 
on quick loop-back therapy, a form of physiotherapy 
for 5 years. In addition to that, the father would 
take the client for 1 to 2-mile walking. From 2013 
to 2017, under a club, the client was trained in 
swimming and physical activities to gain strength 
and gait training. 
Occupation: The client worked for one year as 
a Patient Coordinator at a dental clinic in North 
Carolina, which had been owned by his paternal 
aunt. Following this, the client did a six-month 
internship as a Hospitality worker, during which 
he travelled alone using a special transportation 
service arranged by InReach. The client attended 
Skill-based vocational training for 3 months in India 
under the Department of Adult Independent Living at 
the National Institute for Empowerment of Persons 
with Multiple Disabilities, Chennai. During all these 
periods, the client maintained good relationships 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
399
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
with his colleagues and clients, and there were no 
complaints against him. 
Citizenship and related concerns: The client is 
a U.S. citizen by birth and was registered with the 
Overseas Citizen of India (OCI). The OCl certificate 
was issued on 29.03.2011, allowing the client multiple 
entries to India for a lifetime.
Plan: During the client’s stay in the U.S., he visited 
India five times and stayed in India for a total of 1 
year and 6 months. The client reported that he 
wishes to stay and spend time with his younger 
brother, complete his independent living skill 
training, and start his own business in the U.S.
Observations 
	• Both parents have expressed willingness to provide 
the client with emotional, physical, and financial 
support throughout his future.
	• Both parents have a stable support system, 
including financial and physical resources. 
	• Both parents have concerns regarding the client’s 
care given to the opposite parties. 
	• Both parents blamed the other and believed the 
other party could not care for the client.
	• The father criticised the mother as having mental 
health concerns and unable to care for the 
children independently. At the same time, the 
mother portrayed the father as emotionally weak 
and attempting to impose faith-based practices 
on the client.
	• The father believes the client has reached an age-
appropriate level of development and is legally 
an adult, eliminating the need for custodianship. 
	• The mother reports that the client has difficulties 
performing specific tasks and may require assistance 
with decision-making, necessitating guardianship. 
400
	• The mother is willing to accept the father as 
a co-guardian. 
	• The client is more comfortable with the U.S. 
and wants to start working there. He had 
stayed in India for less than 2 years and had 
difficulty understanding and speaking the local 
language. However, the client had no difficulty 
in staying in India. 
Interpretations 
	• Both parents are concerned about the client’s 
future and are willing to support him and assist 
in enhancing his quality of life. However, their 
interpersonal relationship issues with each other 
and unhealthy communication create different 
opinions regarding the client’s future. 
	• The differences in the parents’ preferences for the 
client’s autonomy further led the parents to have 
different ideas about how the client should live his 
life and make decisions. 
	• Both parents are also worried they will lose their 
importance as parents if the other party gets the 
client’s guardianship. 
	• Though the client was comfortable staying in 
India, he wishes to return to the U.S. and start 
working there. Both parents want the client to 
live freely and as per his wish, regardless of 
where he wishes to stay. 
Recommendations 
	• Parents are recommended to attend parenting 
skills training by a qualified family therapist at least 
twice a month, in-person or online. 
	• If parental conflicts continue, the client should 
be offered supervised care by a recognised 
institution in the U.S. to focus on building 
independent living skills and autonomy of the 
client as he wishes to live in the U.S. in the future. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
401
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
	• The focus of the care has to be on nurturing the 
skills and autonomy of the client in an environment 
where he feels comfortable and familiar.”
3.24	Finally, after completing all the assessments, on 06.02.2025, 
NIMHANS, Bengaluru prepared the Comprehensive Assessment 
Report based on a thorough review of past medical records and 
the various assessments conducted by different departments 
of NIMHANS. They assessed: (i) the Eligibility Reports for 
Specialized Education and Progress and the Evaluation 
Assessment Reports from 2015 to 2022 issued by the West Ada 
School District, Idaho, US; (ii) The report dated 17.05.2023 and 
the addendum dated 23.10.2023 prepared by the Evaluation 
Committee; (iii) The Patient Summaries from 2003 to 2005 
issued by St. Luke’s Regional Medical Centre, Boise, Idaho; (iv) 
The Observation Report dated 11.12.2024 issued by the Institute 
of Mental Health, Kilpauk, Chennai; and (v) The assessment 
reports issued by various departments of NIMHANS, Bengaluru. 
The relevant extracts of the Comprehensive Assessment Report 
are reproduced below: 
1. “Salient Points from the Available Past Records
At birth, Mr. Adith Ramadorai had complications, 
including delayed cry and neonatal seizures. These 
complications resulted in delayed achievement of 
developmental milestones. He has been diagnosed 
with Intellectual Disability and Other Specified 
Neurodevelopmental Disorder associated with 
Cerebral Palsy in the United States. His full-scale 
IQ composite score of 53, which places him in 
the “very low range of cognitive ability”. He 
has exhibited significant cognitive limitations, 
including deficits in spatial-perceptual reasoning, 
conceptual reasoning, knowledge retention, and 
recall ability.
He was also evaluated in the Institute of Mental 
Health, Kilpauk, Chennai and diagnosed with Mild 
Intellectual Disability with an IQ score of 54 with 
50% disability.
402
2. Comprehensive Medical Assessment
The assessments corroborated the earlier diagnoses 
of Ataxic Cerebral Palsy and Disorder of Intellectual 
Development, Mild. Additionally, relevant laboratory 
and clinical investigations were carried out. His 
genetic testing reports are awaited.
The psychological assessments included the 
Vineland Social Maturity Scale (VSMS), Vineland 
Adaptive Behaviour Skills (VABS), Wechsler Adult 
Intelligence Scale - IVth Edition, Binet-Kamat Test 
of Intelligence (BKT), comprehension subtest from 
Malin’s Intelligence Scale for Indian Children (MISC), 
Theory of Mind/False Belief Test, and Delayed 
Discounting Task. The results indicated that Mr. 
Aadith Ramadorai falls within the category of Mild 
Intellectual Disability, with an overall functioning 
level equivalent to that of an 8 to 10 year old child.
The Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) revealed that 
Mr. Aadith Ramadorai exhibits imaginative thinking, 
with adequate production of themes that may be 
understood psychodynamically as wishful thinking in 
the background of the realities of parental separation 
and existing family dynamics.
The psychosocial assessment highlighted that both 
parents are concerned about Mr. Aadith Ramadorai’s 
future and are committed to supporting and enhancing 
his quality of life. However, their interpersonal conflicts 
and communication patterns result in differing and 
often contradictory choices presented before Aadith, 
who has limitations in cognitive and intellectual 
capabilities to reconcile and resolve such differences.
The occupational therapy evaluation indicated that 
Mr. Aadith Ramadorai has limited functional abilities, 
impaired hand function, motor incoordination, and 
dependency on others for activities of daily living. 
Gait and balance training have been recommended 
to improve his mobility.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
403
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
The speech and language assessment determined 
that Mr. Aadith Ramadorai has inadequate speech 
and language development and dysarthria, which is 
secondary to his Intellectual Disability and Cerebral 
Palsy. 
On neuropsychiatric assessment, Mr. Aadith 
Ramadorai was found to have limitations in attention, 
memory, language, and executive function, with 
deficits in abstract thinking, problem-solving, and 
motor coordination. Significant difficulties are noted 
in constructional ability, right-left orientation, and 
frontal lobe tasks.
Mr Adith Ramadorai’s extent of overall disability 
resulting from Mild Intellectual Developmental 
Disorder and Cerebral palsy falls under the 
category of Severe disability with 080%.
Mr. Adith Ramadorai has consistently demonstrated 
the level of understanding and reasoning that 
equipped him to participate with the clinical team in 
all the assessments and provide his assent for all 
the interventions. However, as alluded to above, 
he has limitations with complex decision-making.
Expert Opinion on Mr. Adith Ramadorai’s 
Decision-Making Ability
Based on the results of the comprehensive 
multidisciplinary evaluation detailed above, we infer 
that Mr. Aadith Ramadorai demonstrates independent 
decision-making abilities for basic activities, such as 
performing simple arithmetic calculations, engaging 
in basic social interactions within close circles, 
and carrying out fundamental occupational tasks. 
However, he exhibits significant limitations 
in making informed decisions concerning 
higher-level activities of daily living, financial 
matters, and complex social and occupational 
responsibilities.
His psychological limitations are further compounded 
by physical impairments, including difficulties in 
404
writing, speech, and mobility. Given his mild 
intellectual disability and associated physical 
challenges, his overall cognitive functioning is 
comparable to that of an 8-to-10-year-old child. 
Consequently, he lacks the ability to make 
complex, informed decisions independently. 
In situations requiring higher-order reasoning, 
evaluation of multiple options, or consideration 
of long-term consequences, he would require 
external guidance and support. Any decisions 
made beyond his cognitive capacity may not be 
well-informed or thoroughly considered.
In light of these findings, it is respectfully 
submitted that Mr. Aadith Ramadorai has an overall 
level of intellectual functioning of an 8 to 10 year 
old child. He is capable of making basic personal 
decisions, but he has limitations in making 
complex, independent decisions concerning 
financial, legal, social, and occupational matters 
without substantial support and oversight.”
3.25	The aforementioned Comprehensive Assessment Report was 
duly submitted, in a sealed cover, to this Court on 19.02.2025, 
in the presence of all parties and copies were supplied to them. 
This report will play a crucial role in analysing and adjudicating 
the underlying dispute in the instant appeal. 
B.	
Contentions of the Parties
4.	
Ms. V. Mohana, Learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of 
the Appellant, contended that the High Court fell in grave error in 
its decision and advanced the following submissions:
(a)	 The High Court passed the Impugned Judgement merely on an 
oral examination of Aadith. The High Court ignored the specific 
pleadings regarding his intellectual disability and cognitive 
limitations, substantiated by the reports of the Evaluation 
Committee. Thus, the High Court did not adequately assess 
his ability to provide consent.
(b)	
Aadith has resided in the US his entire life. Since the age of 
8 years, he had been receiving specialized education there 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
405
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
and was unable to begin the next level of schooling designed 
for him, owing to his extended and unplanned stay in India. 
Further, Aadith qualifies for social security benefits and disability 
services provided by the State, including free medical care and a 
maximum supplemental income in excess of USD 960 per month. 
Additionally, he is covered by the health insurance provided by the 
Appellant’s employer until he turns 26 years old. Upon turning 26 
years old, he would be eligible for full medical coverage owing to 
the Medicaid Program of the State and Federal Departments of 
the US. Finally, once he is able to work, he would be covered by 
the Federal Social Security Disability Insurance Program, which 
would cover any loss of income faced as a result of his disability. 
By permitting him to continue residing in India, the High Court 
did not act according to his best interests and welfare.
(c)	
The High Court failed to consider that at the time of hearing of 
the Habeas Corpus petition, the Idaho Court had already granted 
the Appellant full and permanent guardianship over Aadith. In 
this context, the High Court should have shown more restraint 
as the parties involved were US citizens and their rights and 
liabilities were already being dealt with by a court of competent 
jurisdiction in their native state in the US. 
(d)	 Aadith was being manipulated and tutored against the Appellant 
by Respondent No. 4. Through this, Respondent No. 4 was 
actively trying to disobey the Court’s orders by restricting Aadith’s 
access to the Appellant. 
5.	
Per contra, Ms. Liz Mathew, Learned Senior Counsel, appearing 
on behalf of Respondent No. 4, put forth the following submissions: 
(a)	 Aadith is completely mentally fit to make decisions about his own 
welfare and well-being. Despite his limitations, he is capable 
of informed judgment and independent or supported decision-
making. He does not require a guardian by any means and 
needs only some support and assistance, which Respondent 
No. 4 has been duly providing. 
(b)	 Respondent No. 4 has never manipulated or coerced his son, 
Aadith, who desired to go to India and stay with his father. 
Furthermore, after the order dated 16.12.2024 was read over 
to Aadith, he expressed that he did not want to reside with his 
406
mother, even though he had been interacting with her frequently 
on video call. In fact, when he met his mother on 24.12.2024, 
he was visibly distressed by the Appellant drudging up old 
memories to convince him to live with her. He also expressed 
that he wanted to be represented in the proceedings before this 
Court. Having sought legal consultation, Respondent No. 4 was 
informed that as Aadith was a major, he had the right to consult 
and appoint his own lawyers. Accordingly, Aadith interacted with 
a lawyer in Delhi over calls and provided instructions to file the 
interlocutory applications before this Court. The decision not 
to live with the Appellant was solely taken by Aadith, out of his 
own free will and based on the legal advice he received.
(c)	
Respondent No. 4, as Aadith’s primary caregiver, has safeguarded 
his son’s best interests and welfare in India. He has been provided 
with a stable, nurturing, and supportive environment where he 
has been encouraged to express his opinions and exercise his 
autonomy. In comparison, under the Appellant’s care, Aadith’s 
social, physical, and psychological growth were being impeded 
due to the Appellant’s constant dismissal of Aadith’s capacities. 
With Respondent No. 4’s guidance, Aadith has been undergoing 
requisite sessions for skill training for persons with disabilities 
in Chennai, is living under the loving embrace of his paternal 
family, and is able to showcase greater autonomy, thus attesting 
to his best interests and welfare being served. 
(d)	 The assessment conducted by the Institute of Mental Health, 
Kilpauk diagnosed Aadith with Mild Intellectual Disability, 
established an IQ score of 54, and recognized a disability 
level of 50%. This is in stark contrast to the report prepared 
by NIMHANS, Bengaluru. Persons with borderline, mild, or 
moderate intellectual disabilities are capable of living in normal 
social conditions, though they may need some supervision or 
assistance from time to time. Aadith’s developmental delays 
should not be equated with mental incapacity and his decisions 
should be respected under law.
C.	
Issues
6.	
Having given our thoughtful consideration to the events that have 
transpired and the submissions at length, the following issues arise 
for the consideration of this Court: 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
407
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
i.	
Whether Aadith is capable of making independent decisions?
ii.	
Whether Aadith’s best interests and welfare would be served 
by permitting him to continue residing with Respondent No. 4 
in India?
D.	
Analysis
D.1	 Issue No. 1: Aadith’s capacity to make independent 
decisions 
7.	
The issue herein concerns Aadith’s ability to make independent 
decisions regarding his future and well-being. To this end, the 
Appellant argued that Aadith has had an intellectual disability since 
childhood, resulting in a full-scale IQ of 53, which features in the 
‘very low range of cognitive ability’. To substantiate this, she relied 
on the detailed report dated 17.05.2023 and the addendum dated 
23.10.2023 prepared by the Evaluation Committee constituted by the 
Idaho Department of Health and Welfare. She pointed out specific 
findings in these reports including that, Aadith ‘lacked the capacity 
to make decisions, even at a rudimentary level’ and that he 
‘was someone who could be easily manipulated into speaking, 
signing, or acting against his own best interest.’ Furthermore, she 
adduced the decision of the Idaho Court which declared him to be a 
‘Developmentally Disabled Person’ and a ‘Vulnerable Adult.’ She 
contended that by virtue of his disability, he cannot make independent, 
legally-binding decisions on subjects that will substantially impact his 
future, such as, his place of permanent residence.
8.	
Per contra, Respondent No. 4 has vehemently argued that Aadith, 
though suffering from a disability, is mentally fit to make decisions 
about his own welfare and well-being. To substantiate this, he relied 
on the Observation Report dated 11.12.2024 issued by the Institute 
of Mental Health, Kilpauk, Chennai. In fact, Respondent No. 4 has 
placed on record that Aadith wants to reside in India with him and 
not with his mother. Furthermore, the High Court had interacted 
with Aadith and concluded that he was consensually living with 
Respondent No. 4 in India. 
9.	
That being the fundamental dissonance between the parties’ 
viewpoints and to arrive at a conclusive determination regarding his 
cognitive capacity, as mentioned earlier, on 08.01.2025 this Court 
requested for Aadith and his younger brother, Arjun, to undergo 
408
medical assessment at NIMHANS, Bengaluru. In pursuance thereof, 
the doctors at NIMHANS, Bengaluru were requested to provide 
their expert opinion as to whether Aadith is in a position to make 
independent decisions. 
10.	 The reports, as extracted in paras 3.20 to 3.24, were duly received 
by this Court in a sealed cover on 19.02.2025. The contents 
have been thoroughly examined. It may be seen that Aadith was 
brought to NIMHANS, Bengaluru on 13.01.2025 by his parents 
and was admitted as an in-patient on 14.01.2025, with his brother. 
Detailed assessments were then conducted in collaboration with 
the Departments of Clinical Psychology, Psychiatric Social Work, 
Neurology, Speech Pathology and Audiology, Neurorehabilitation 
and Genetics. To properly understand the report, it is necessary to 
lay down the conclusions of the assessments individually conducted 
by each department and then, advert to the final findings in the 
Comprehensive Assessment Report. 
11.	 First, the Department of Clinical Psychology (see para 3.20) 
administered seven tests to Aadith and on the basis of the same 
noted that: (i) He is capable of carrying out basic daily activities, such 
as brushing his teeth and selecting clothing; (ii) He struggles with 
independent self-care when left alone and has difficulty performing 
more complex tasks such as, handling a knife to cut fruits and seeking 
medical attention; (iii) He struggles with basic addition and subtraction; 
(iv) He has difficulty performing simple mental calculations; (v) He 
lacks the ability to navigate social situations safely and identify harmful 
relationships or situations; (vi) He would have difficulty engaging 
in small remunerative work such as, making simple garments and 
making minor repairs; (vii) He faces challenges performing routine, 
responsible chores for his age such as, cleaning a car and washing 
windows; and (viii) He would have difficulty maintaining a job for 
at least one year, even if required to work only 10 hours per week. 
Owing to this, the report by the Department of Clinical Psychology 
concluded that Aadith functions at the level of an 8 to 10-year-old 
child. As a result, he would not be able to make informed decisions 
by himself. Even in the event he made such decisions, they would 
be made without considering all available options and repercussions. 
12.	 Second, the Department of Speech Pathology and Audiology (see 
para 3.21), in their report, noted that Aadith uses and understands 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
409
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
simple sentences, but struggles to utilize and comprehend complex 
sentences. The report concluded that his speech and language 
abilities were inadequate, overall. 
13.	 Lastly, the Department of Psychiatric Social Work (see para 3.23) 
studied Aadith’s living arrangements, education, training, occupation, 
and future plans. Further, exhaustive interviews were conducted 
with the Appellant and Respondent No. 4, individually, to determine 
their perspectives on parenting, expectations from Aadith, plans for 
his future, and opinions about the other parent. Based on this, the 
Psychosocial Assessment Report noted that Aadith wanted to return 
to the US and start working there. Further, it was observed that both 
parents wanted him to live freely and as per his wish, regardless of 
where he wishes to stay. Ultimately, the report by the Department 
of Psychiatric Social Work recommends that: (i) if the parental 
conflicts continue, Aadith should be offered supervised care by a 
recognized institution in the US; and (ii) the focus of his care must 
be on nurturing his skills and autonomy in an environment where 
he feels most comfortable and familiar.
14.	 Finally, the Comprehensive Assessment Report was prepared after a 
thorough review of past medical records and the exhaustive medical 
assessments conducted by various departments in NIMHANS, 
Bengaluru (see para 3.24). This report notes that: (i) From birth till 
the age of 20, Aadith was living in the US; (ii) He has a full-scale 
composite IQ score of 53, which places him in the ‘very low range 
of cognitive ability’; (iii) He has significant cognitive limitations such 
as, conceptual reasoning, spatial-perceptual reasoning, knowledge, 
retention, and recall ability; (iv) His overall functioning level is 
equivalent to that of an 8 to 10-year-old child; and (v) His extent 
of overall disability, resulting from Mild Intellectual Developmental 
Disorder and Cerebral Palsy falls under the category of severe 
disability with 80%. 
15.	 The Comprehensive Assessment Report, thus concludes that 
Aadith demonstrates independent decision-making abilities for basic 
activities such as, simple arithmetic calculations and basic social 
interactions within close circles. It put forth that he exhibits significant 
limitations in taking decisions concerning higher-level activities of 
daily living, financial matters, and complex social and occupational 
responsibilities. His psychological limitations were underlined to be 
410
further compounded by his physical impairments and as such, he 
lacks the ability to make complex, informed decisions independently. 
Additionally, it detailed that those situations requiring higher-order 
reasoning, evaluation of multiple options, or consideration of long-term 
consequences require external guidance and support. In essence, 
the report conclusively laid down that independent decisions made 
beyond Aadith’s cognitive capacity may not be well-informed or 
thoroughly considered. 
16.	 These findings are further substantiated by the report dated 
17.05.2023 and the addendum dated 23.10.2023 prepared by the 
Evaluation Committee constituted by the Idaho Department of Health 
and Welfare (West Hub Developmental Disabilities Program). The 
Evaluation Committee consisted of a Psychologist, a Physician, and a 
Social Worker. The report dated 17.05.2023 was prepared based on 
an in-person interview with the Appellant and the documents provided 
by both parties. These documents included the Guardianship Petition, 
Counter-Petition, several of Aadith’s medical reports over the years, 
eligibility reports from his school, and background check reports 
from 2022 and 2023. The report dated 17.05.2023 concluded that, 
among others: (i) He does not have the capacity to live independently 
without any supervision or assistance; (ii) Language must be overly 
simplified for him to understand; (iii) He requires constant guidance, 
assistance, and supervision in performing basic self-care tasks such 
as eating, hygiene, grooming; and (iv) He requires a combination of 
specialized care and inter-disciplinary treatments which are lifelong 
and individually planned. The report notes that his cognitive limitations 
significantly impact his ability to manage his health, food, finances, 
and safety needs without support and therefore, he requires some 
type of guardianship. 
17.	 After this report was sent to the parties and the authorities, 
Respondent No. 4 brought Aadith for his in-person interview with the 
Evaluation Committee. Thereafter, an addendum dated 25.10.2023 
was issued. This addendum dated 25.10.2023, while reiterating all 
the previously stated conclusions, also stated that he presents as 
someone who can be easily misguided and manipulated. Ultimately, 
the Evaluation Committee recommended full guardianship by one, 
but not both parents, as Aadith could be easily maneuvered into 
speaking, signing, or acting against his own best interest. Further, 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
411
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
the Evaluation Committee opined that his voice was not being heard 
in decisions concerning him as he had been denied access to his 
mother and his brother. 
18.	 The Observation Report issued by the Institute of Mental Health, 
Kilpauk, Chennai (see para 3.17) and relied upon by Respondent 
No. 4, does not seem to have considered Aadith’s old medical records 
and reports when evaluating him. In fact, it seems that Aadith’s 
medical history was obtained only from his father. Furthermore, the 
Observation Report does not specify how Aadith was assessed, 
which parameters were used for assessment, and which tests were 
administered to him during the evaluation. For these reasons alone, 
the Observation Report cannot be relied upon. Regardless, it clearly 
and unequivocally states that Aadith requires assistance in making 
complex and important life decisions. 
19.	 It is pertinent to note that the report and addendum of the Evaluation 
Committee were brought on the record of the High Court, to help them 
decide whether Aadith was living consensually in India. However, the 
Impugned Judgement has not dealt with the medical assessments 
or school records in any capacity. In fact, the High Court has passed 
its judgement simply based on a few minutes of oral interaction 
with Aadith. In this regard, we are constrained to hold that the High 
Court’s decision was passed in haste, without fully delving into the 
nuances of the matter.
20.	 In our considered view, even though Courts are well within their rights 
to come to a finding distinct from an expert’s report, they cannot 
discard the expert’s opinion, as a whole, for no rhyme or reason. 
Given that the dispute before the High Court concerned the sensitive 
and complex issue of alleged illegal detention of a person with severe 
cognitive limitations, the High Court ought to have considered and 
given due credence to the Evaluation Committee’s report. If the 
High Court had any doubt as to the reliability of the report and its 
conclusions, it ought to have ordered an enquiry through a reputable 
medical institution. Dismissing all aspects of scientific assessment in 
a highly specialized and niche area of medicine was misconceived 
and ill-founded. As such, the Impugned Judgement does not enlighten 
us as to Aadith’s decision-making abilities. 
21.	 For this purpose, we must rely on the reports produced by 
NIMHANS, Bengaluru and the Evaluation Committee. At the risk 
412
of reiteration, it seems to us that both bodies have concurred 
that owing to his cognitive and physical limitations, Aadith does 
not possess the capacity to make well-informed, independent 
decisions, for his own benefit, on complex subject matter, such 
as long-term residence. 
22.	 In the event there is any confusion or doubt regarding a person’s 
capacity and ability to make independent decisions and if there is 
a definitive opinion on disability endorsed by a specialist, domain 
expert, or a doctor, the Court should give due credence to that 
opinion. If the expert’s report concludes that the mental or physical 
age of the person concerned is well below the age of majority, there 
can be no inference of any ‘implied’ or ‘express’ consent to any act 
which might have a substantive impact on the consenting person. 
Unless there are strong reasons to disbelieve an expert’s report to 
this effect, the Courts must be overly-cautious in coming to a finding 
contrary thereto. Bearing this principle in mind, we must conclude 
that as Aadith was assessed to possess the cognitive abilities of an 
8 to 10-year-old child, the reasoning assigned by the High Court, of 
him consenually living in India, is seriously errant. 
23.	 As a result, we must answer the first issue in the negative—Aadith 
cannot make independent, legally-binding decisions on his own. In 
light of this, we find ourselves compelled to hold that the High Court 
erred in coming to a finding on Aadith’s alleged illegal detention 
solely based on his perceived ‘independent’ decision to reside in 
India with Respondent No. 4.
D.2	 Issue No. 2: Aadith’s best interests and welfare
24.	 Since we have already opined that Aadith cannot make independent 
decisions, it is the duty of the Court, under the parens patriae doctrine, 
to determine the course of action that would best serve his interests 
and welfare.1 
25.	 To this end, the Appellant contended that Aadith’s best interests would 
be served by repatriating him to the US, where he could complete 
his schooling in a familiar environment and reside in the company 
of his younger brother, to whom he is deeply attached. She further 
1	
Shafin Jahan v. Asokan K.M., (2018) 16 SCC 368, para 45. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
413
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
contended that Aadith would be subject to ‘Parental Alienation 
Syndrome’ if allowed to stay long-term with Respondent No. 4. For 
this, the Appellant has relied on Sheoli Hati v. Somnath Das2 and 
Vivek Singh v. Romani Singh.3 
26.	 Per contra, Respondent No. 4 contended that though specially-
abled, Aadith’s wishes should be the sole criterion to determine his 
place of residence. For this, he has placed reliance on Girish v. 
Radhamony K.4 and Suchita Srivastava v. Chandigarh Admn.5 
Let us analyze these cases to determine whether they substantiate 
the stand taken by Respondent No. 4. 
27.	 First and foremost, Girish v. Radhamony K. (supra) concerned 
the alleged kidnapping of a minor girl. The girl came before the 
Court, claimed to be major, and expressed that she had left of her 
own will and volition. This Court held that, on this basis, the Habeas 
Corpus petition should have been dismissed instead of the High 
Court directing the registration of an FIR. Unlike the instant case, 
she made the decision independently as she was a fully functioning 
adult with no conditions limiting her cognitive ability. The lack of 
cognitive impairment, alone, renders this case unreliable in the 
instant proceedings. 
28.	 The judgement in Suchita Srivastava v. Chandigarh Admn. (supra) 
pertained to terminating the pregnancy of a woman suffering from 
mild to moderate mental retardation, who had been impregnated 
through rape. The expert body noted that her mental age was 
equivalent to that of a 9-year-old child. Respondent No. 4 appears 
to rely on this case because this Court provided due deference to 
the opinions and desires of the victim-therein, who was observed 
to have the same level of cognitive functioning as Aadith. However, 
the rationale for relying on her opinions was extremely nuanced and 
motivated by other factors. 
29.	 This Court held that the language of the Medical Termination of 
Pregnancy Act, 1971 required the Court to respect the decision of 
a major. Alongside this, the Court considered the fact that at such a 
2	
Sheoli Hati v. Somnath Das, (2019) 7 SCC 490. 
3	
Vivek Singh v. Romani Singh, (2017) 3 SCC 231. 
4	
Girish v. Radhamony K., (2009) 16 SCC 360. 
5	
Suchita Srivastava v. Chandigarh Admn., (2009) 9 SCC 1.
414
late stage in the pregnancy, it would have been dangerous to direct 
her to undergo an abortion. The Court was seemingly influenced by 
an assurance of the Chairperson of the National Trust for Welfare of 
Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation, and Multiple 
Disabilities that the Trust was prepared to look after the interests of 
the victim in question, including assistance with childcare. Since there 
is no Statute prescribing a particular course of action in the instant 
case and Aadith is unlikely to face life-threatening repercussions 
due to a decision of this Court, the above-stated decision does not 
support Respondent No. 4’s case. Regardless thereto, we reiterate 
the correct principle of law, which we have briefly drawn in para 22.
30.	 Curiously, both parties have relied on a common judgement, i.e. 
Nithya Anand Raghavan v. State (NCT of Delhi),6 albeit for different 
reasons. Respondent No. 4 relied on it owing to the similarity in the 
facts, where a child was removed from a foreign country by one 
parent and brought to India, despite adverse findings by the relevant 
Foreign Court. Ultimately, the child was allowed to stay in India with 
the parent, regardless of the Foreign Court’s contrary orders. The 
Appellant, however, relied on this case owing to the primacy given 
to the doctrine of ‘best interests and welfare of the child.’ Essentially, 
the parties have relied on this case to highlight various aspects of 
the ‘best interest of a child’ principle, as well as the primacy afforded 
to decisions of Foreign Courts. 
31.	 In this vein, it is a settled position of law that the principle of comity 
of courts and a pre-existing order of a Foreign Court must yield to 
the best interests of the child, especially when the Court has decided 
to conduct an elaborate enquiry in this regard.7 Such cases must be 
decided on the sole and predominant criterion of ‘what would serve 
the interests and welfare’ of the minor.8 The pre-existing order of a 
Foreign Court is merely one of the circumstances to consider when 
assessing the best interests and welfare of the person concerned.9 
This doctrine was evolved to protect children who may, unwittingly, 
6	
Nithya Anand Raghavan v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2017) 8 SCC 454. 
7	
Nithya Anand Raghavan v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2017) 8 SCC 454, para 46. 
8	
Elizabeth Dinshaw v. Arvand M. Dinshaw, (1987) 1 SCC 42, para 8; Dhanwanti Joshi v. Madhav Unde, 
(1998) 1 SCC 112, para 21; Rohith Thammana Gowda v. State of Karnataka, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 937, 
para 8.
9	
Nithya Anand Raghavan v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2017) 8 SCC 454, para 42. 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
415
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
become collateral damage in their parents’ legal disputes. It has 
gained significance over the past several years, owing to the frequency 
and ease of migration. 
32.	 To consider the interests of the child, the Court must take into account 
all attending circumstances and the totality of the situation. The 
Court must consider the welfare and happiness of the child as the 
paramount consideration and go into all relevant aspects of welfare 
including stability and security, loving and understanding care and 
guidance, and full development of the child’s character, personality, 
and talents.10 The Court has to give due weightage to the child’s 
ordinary contentment, health, education, intellectual development, 
favourable surroundings, and future prospects. Further, over and 
above physical comforts, moral and ethical values also have to be 
taken note of, as they constitute equal if not more important factors 
than the others.11
33.	 As per the Eligibility Reports and Evaluation Reports issued by his 
school district, Aadith was receiving a specially-curated curriculum 
to help him enhance his skills and pursue his education despite his 
limitations. All the reports from the school district indicate that he 
was happy attending classes, was excited about graduating high 
school, and looked forward to working at a job. In fact, he had already 
worked part-time in a hotel and in his paternal aunt’s dental clinic, 
under the supervision of a job coach. He was making plans for his 
future, which he expected to continue in the US. In the 2022-2023 
academic year, he was due to start a Transitional Program to help 
him curate vocational and non-vocational training skills, alongside 
his education. He was supposed to be part of this Transitional 
Program from 18 years to 21 years of age, i.e. for three years. His 
enrolment and participation in this program were interrupted solely 
by his impromptu trip to India. 
34.	 Though he may be content with his father in India, he reiterated to 
the doctors at NIMHANS, Bengaluru that he wants to reside with his 
brother, complete his living skill training, and start his own business 
in the US. His brother, Arjun, has been diagnosed with Intellectual 
Disability and Autism Spectrum Disorder. He is also enrolled in a 
10	
V. Ravi Chandran (Dr.) (2) v. Union of India, (2010) 1 SCC 174, para 29.
11	
Gaurav Nagpal v. Sumedha Nagpal, (2009) 1 SCC 42, para 50. 
416
specially-curated curriculum for his education in the US. As assessed 
by NIMHANS, Bengaluru, like his brother, he possesses a ‘full-scale 
composite IQ score of 60, which classifies him within the “very 
low range of cognitive ability.”’ Further ‘while he has the general 
cognitive functioning equivalent to that of an 8 to 10-year-old 
child, he has considerable limitations in independently managing 
financial, legal, social, and occupational matters without 
substantial external support and oversight.’ The Idaho Department 
of Health and Welfare prepared a Guardianship Evaluation for Arjun, 
whereunder they recommended that the Appellant be granted full 
guardianship. 
35.	 Here is a case where Aadith, his parents, and his younger brother, 
Arjun, have resided in the US for almost two decades and are all 
US citizens. The sons were born and brought up in the US together, 
owing to which they are accustomed to the culture, the activities, 
the language, and the schooling there. As a natural corollary, they 
know no other way of life and undeniably have their roots in the US. 
Regardless of these commonalities, the brothers share certain unique 
characteristics which perhaps help them understand, relate to, and 
lean on each other. This emotional relationship, in our considered 
opinion, is the foundational strength of their self-confidence, sense 
of security and all other kinds of support, which they are unlikely 
to receive elsewhere, outside of close family. If separated by entire 
continents, we are confronted by the unfortunate possibility that their 
bond may wither away with the passage of time. It is necessary for 
them to retain their connection as they grow up and grow old, to 
have a constant bonding through the years. For these reasons, it is 
imperative that they stay together. 
36.	 In this light, it seems to us that regardless of the parents being 
divorced, the entire family appears to have set up a comfortable 
life for themselves in the US. Fortunately, neither of the parents is 
facing any financial difficulties jeopardizing their lives there. Given 
their established routine and support systems, we seriously doubt 
whether it is in Aadith’s best interests to continue residing in India. 
37.	 Aadith does not seem to have received much training or education 
during his time in India. Besides attending a 3-month-long skill-based 
vocational training course under the Department of Adult Independent 
Living at the National Institute for Empowerment of Persons with 
Multiple Disabilities, Chennai, he does not appear to have obtained 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
417
Sharmila Velamur v. V. Sanjay and Ors.
any long-term formal and supervised training or education. Further, 
he has not taken up a part-time or full-time job as he was able to 
in the US. Finally, other than Respondent Nos. 4 to 6, we have not 
been informed of any other family or formal/informal support systems 
here that he interacts with regularly or can depend upon. Regardless, 
the doctors at NIMHANS, Bengaluru noted that he was struggling 
to understand the language spoken in Chennai. 
38.	 In comparison, he has completed most of his schooling in the US; he 
has access to long-term specialized welfare services and curriculums; 
he has a peer group; an established routine; and places to regularly 
attend for socialization. Further, he is familiar with the language and 
lifestyle in the US. He desires to be in the company of his younger 
brother, from whom he has been separated for far too long. Finally, 
owing to their citizenship, the Idaho Court has already passed 
an order appointing the Appellant as Aadith’s full and permanent 
guardian. Taking this into account, we cannot state that Aadith has 
given up his roots in the US and has developed new roots in India, 
due to which he should not be displaced.
39.	 Considering all the facts and surrounding circumstances, we believe 
it is in Aadith’s best interests and welfare to return to the US, where 
he can complete his schooling and reside with his younger brother, 
under the Appellant’s guardianship. We clarify that this does not 
mean that Respondent No. 4 should not be a part of his son’s life; 
rather, it is his duty to become part of the life his son has already 
established in the US. 
E.	
Conclusion and Directions
40.	 This case, like all custody matters, has taken a toll on all those 
involved. Given the sensitivity and complexity of the subject-matter, 
it is imperative to put all the disputes to rest.
41.	 Accordingly, we deem it appropriate to allow this appeal and set 
aside the Impugned Judgment of the High Court dated 09.08.2024 
with the following directions and conclusions:
i.	
Aadith Ramadorai is incapable of making independent decisions 
as of now; 
ii.	
Aadith Ramadorai’s interests would be best served by continuing 
to reside in the US, alongside his younger brother, Arjun 
Ramadorai, and under the guardianship of the Appellant;
418
iii.	
From the date of pronouncement of this judgement, Aadith 
Ramadorai shall be deemed to be under the sole custody of 
the Appellant; 
iv.	
Pursuantly, the Appellant is directed to return to the US with 
both the sons within 15 days and ensure that they continue 
their schooling there. Respondent No. 4 shall not cause any 
impediment to their return;
v.	
Now that the controversy pertaining to the custody of Aadith 
Ramadorai stands resolved, the office of US Consulate-General, 
Chennai will return his US passport and facilitate the Appellant 
in taking him back to the US immediately; 
vi.	
The Appellant and Respondent No. 4 shall share their phone 
numbers, email IDs, and home addresses with each other, so 
that they can remain in contact for the sake of their children; 
vii.	 Neither the Appellant nor Respondent No. 4 shall restrict the 
sons’ access to the other parent; and 
viii.	 Owing to substantial compliance with this Court’s subsequent 
order dated 08.01.2025, the contempt proceedings are hereby 
dropped.
42.	 The instant appeal is allowed in the above terms.
43.	 Ordered accordingly. Pending applications if any, also stand disposed 
of. 
44.	 Before parting, we would like to seize this opportunity and place 
on record our profound appreciation and gratitude for the team at 
NIMHANS, Bengaluru, for accommodating our time-bound request to 
assess Aadith and Arjun and aiding us in this exercise of adjudicating 
this delicate and complicated dispute.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey