[2025] 6 S.C.R. 156 : 2025 INSC 627
Santosh Devi 
v. 
Sunder
(Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 12658 of 2025)
02 May 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala* and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court rightly dismissed the second appeal filed 
by the petitioner herein (plaintiff) affirming the judgment passed 
by the First Appellate Court which had upheld the decree passed 
by the trial court dismissing the suit on the ground of limitation.
Headnotes†
Limitation Act, 1963 – s.17 – Effect of fraud or mistake – Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 – Or.VII, r.6 – Grounds of exemption 
from limitation law – Petitioner filed suit seeking cancellation 
of sale deed on the ground that fraud was played upon her to 
sign the sale deed and thereby transfer the subject property – 
Suit dismissed on the ground of limitation – Challenge to:
Held: The initial onus was on the plaintiff who had challenged 
the sale deed – Fraud was alleged as a ground upon which the 
plaintiff justified the institution of the suit long after the expiry of 
the limitation period – Further, the requirement of Or.VII, r.6, CPC 
is also clear – The plaint should show the ground upon which the 
exemption from the normal period of limitation is claimed – It is not 
the mere use of general words such as ‘fraud’ that can serve as the 
foundation for the plea – Such expressions are quite ineffective to 
give the legal basis in the absence of particular statements of fact 
which alone can furnish the requisite basis for the action – Thus, 
the fraud relating to the sale transaction as alleged itself would 
not help the plaintiff in getting over the plea of limitation in this 
case – Under/s.17, Limitation Act, the plaintiff should have been 
kept out of knowledge of his right to sue by means of fraud – The 
alleged fraud relating to the sale transaction itself has nothing to 
do with the question viz., that the plaintiff had been kept out of 
knowledge of her right to file a suit for cancellation of the sale 
deed because of fraud – High Court committed no error in passing 
the impugned judgment. [Paras 17-19, 21, 22]
* Author
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
157
Santosh Devi v. Sunder
Case Law Cited
Janardhanam Prasad v. Ramdas (2007) 2 LJR 783; Prem Singh 
and Ors. v. Birbal and Ors. [2006] Supp. 1 SCR 692 : (2006) 5 
SCC 353 – referred to.
Walling Ford v. Mutul Society (1880) 5 A.C. 685 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; Limitation Act, 1963.
List of Keywords
Section 17 of Limitation Act, 1963; Order VII Rule 6 of Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908; Fraud; Suit for cancellation of sale deed; 
Dismissal of suit; Limitation; Exemption from the normal period 
of limitation; Kept out of knowledge of right to sue; By means of 
fraud; Concurrent findings; Onus of proof; Registered document; 
Presumed to be genuine.
Case Arising From
EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Special Leave 
Petition (Civil) No. 12658 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.07.2024 of the High Court 
of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in RSA No. 520 of 2020
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Petitioner:
Karan Kapoor, Manik Kapoor, Ms. Srishti Singla, Shrey Kapoor.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
J.B. Pardiwala, J. 
1.	
Delay condoned in filing and refiling the SLP.
2.	
This petition arises from the judgment and order passed by the 
High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh dated 23.7.2024 
in Regular Second Appeal No. 520/2020 by which the High Court 
dismissed the second appeal preferred by the petitioner herein and 
158
Supreme Court Reports
thereby affirmed the judgment and order passed by the First Appellate 
Court affirming the judgment and decree passed by the trial court 
dismissing the suit.
3.	
The petitioner is before us against the concurrent findings of three 
Courts.
4.	
It appears from the materials on record that the petitioner herein 
instituted Civil Suit No.310-RBT of 2012 in the Court of the Additional 
Civil Judge (SD), Ganaur for declaration with consequential, 
mandatory as well as permanent injunction.
5.	
In the plaint, the petitioner prayed for the following reliefs:-
“It is, therefore, prayed that a decree for declaration may 
kindly be granted declaring the sale deed no.638 dated 
26.05.2008 as well as mutation no. 5340 dt.29.08.2008 
be set aside to the extent of 1/2 share executed in favour 
of the defendant Sunder, who fraudulently, forcibly get 
executed the sale dead and sanctioned mutation to the 
extent of 1/2 share of the suit land in his favour.
It is, therefore further prayed that a decree for mandatory 
injunction may kindly be passed in favour of the plaintiff 
against the defendant directing the defendant to get 
executed and registered the sale deed as well as rectified 
the mutation no. 5340 dt. 29.08.2008 to the extent of ½ 
share of the land detailed in para no.2 of the plaint in 
favour of the plaintiff, which he got fraudulently, wrongly, 
illegally got registered in his own favour against the sale 
consideration already paid by the plaintiff to the vender, in 
favour of the plaintiff without getting any sale consideration 
and stamp and registration at his own risk and costs. 
It is further prayed that a decree for permanent injunction 
may kindly be passed in favour of the plaintiff against the 
defendant restraining him from alienating any art of the suit 
land detailed in para no.2 of the plaint, under the grab of 
wrong illegal sale deed no. 638 dt. 26.05.08 and mutation 
no. 5340 dt. 29.08.08 forcibly and illegally to any person 
for all time to come.”
6.	
Insofar as the averments regarding the cause of action as pleaded 
in the plaint is concerned, the same reads thus:-
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
159
Santosh Devi v. Sunder
“That the cause of action firstly secured to the plaintiff only 
on 26.05.2008, the date of execution and registration of 
the sale deed to the extent of ½ share of land in favour of 
defendant out of the suit land. Secondly in March, 2010 
when the plaintiff came to know about the above wrong, 
illegal sale deed to the extent of ½ share in favour of the 
defendant, and then on 19.09.2012 the date of serving the 
legal notice through registered post upon the defendant, 
and lastly on 08.10.2012, the date of last refusal by the 
defendant to accede the genuine request of the plaintiff.”
7.	
The trial court framed the following issues for its consideration:-
“1. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree of declaration 
that the sale deed No.638 dated 26.5.2008 and its mutation 
No.5340 dated 29.8.2008 are illegal, null and void to the 
extent of 1⁄2 share as prayed for ? OPP.
2. Whether the defendant is liable to be directed to get 
executed and registered the sale deed as well as rectified 
the mutation No.5340 dated 29.8.2006(sic) to the extent 
of 1⁄2 share of the land detailed in para No.2 of the plaint 
in favour of plaintiff, as prayed for ? OPP.
3. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of permanent 
injunction as prayed for ? OPP.
4. Whether the suit filed by the plaintiff is not maintainable 
in the present form ? OPD.
5. Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action and locus-
standi to file the present suit ? OPD.
6. Whether the plaintiff has not come to the court with 
clean hands and has suppressed the material facts from 
the Court ? OPD.
7. Whether the suit is barred by law of limitation ? OPD.
8. Whether the plaintiff has not affixed the ad-volerum 
court fee, thus suit is liable to fail? OPD.”
8.	
It appears from the materials on record that the trial court essentially 
dismissed the suit on the point of limitation. We may quote the 
relevant findings recorded by the trial court in this regard:-
160
Supreme Court Reports
“The relevant extract of his cross-examination is reproduced 
here under :-
...Yaha Thik Hai Ki Registry Likhne Ke Bad Ram Parshad 
Arjinawis Ne Hum Sabhi Ko Padkar Suna Di Thi Aur Sabi 
Ne Thik Mankar Apne Apne Anguthe Dastak Kiye The…”
Similarly, the vendor of the impugned sale deed – Ex.PW.8 
has deposed that he put his signature on the impugned 
sale deed at the instance of plaintiff. The relevant extract 
of his cross-examination is reproduced here under :-
“...Meine Bhimsain Ke Kehne Par Thik Mankar Apne 
Sign Kiye The…”
Plaintiff himself has claimed in his cross-examination that 
he put his signatures after reading last one and half line 
which was pertaining to payment of the sale consideration. 
Meaning thereby, plaintiff himself has also admitted that 
he was present at the time of execution of the impugned 
sale deed; put his signatures and appeared before Sub 
Registrar. This deposition of plaintiff that he just read 
last one and half line is not comprehendable as he is 
an educated property dealer. Though, at this juncture, 
the execution of impugned sale deed without payment 
stood established yet, from the aforesaid discussion, it 
is abundantly clear on file that factum of execution of 
impugned sale deed to the extent of ½ share in favour 
of defendant was in his notice/knowledge at the time 
of execution of the impugned sale deed itself i.e. on 
26.5.2009.”
9.	
The trial court relied upon the decision of this Court rendered in the 
case of Janardhanam Prasad vs. Ramdas , (2007) 2 LJR 783, for 
the proposition that the period of limitation for the purpose of seeking 
cancellation of sale deed would be from the date of registration of 
the sale deed.
10.	 The suit ultimately came to be dismissed. 
11.	 The first appeal filed by the petitioner also came to be dismissed. 
The First Appellate Court recorded the following findings:-
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
161
Santosh Devi v. Sunder
“20. I have given thoughtful consideration to the submissions 
made by both sides. It is pertinent to note that a reading of 
the impugned sale deed Ex.P18 reveals that the plaintiff is 
also a signatory to the sale deed. It is also noteworthy that 
the plaintiff admitted his signatures on the sale deed during 
his cross-examination as PW.10. It is further significant 
to note that PW.5 Ram Parshad, Deed Writer stated that 
the sale deed was prepared by him as per instructions of 
the parties and the contents of the same were read over 
and explained to the parties who accepted them to be 
correct and thereafter affixed their thumb impressions and 
signatures on the same. It is also relevant to note that PW.7 
Rameshwar Dass- Numberdar who is attesting witness 
to the sale deed admitted during his cross-examination 
that the contents of the sale deed were read over by the 
Deed Writer before all the parties who accepted them to 
be correct and thereafter affixed their thumb impressions 
and signatures on the same. It is further worthwhile to 
note that PW.8 Ajit Kumar-vendor has made a similar 
statement in his cross-examination. It is also important 
to note that the sale deed Ex.P18 is registered document 
which bears endorsement of the Sub- Registrar that its 
contents were read over and explained to the parties who 
accepted them are to be correct and said endorsement 
carries presumption of truth as per Sub Section (2) of 
Section 60 of the Registration Act, 1908. In these facts 
and circumstances of the case, I am of the considered 
opinion that it is duly established that plaintiff was duly 
aware about the execution and registration of the sale 
deed Ex.P18 in his name and in the name of defendant 
to the extent of half share each since its execution and 
registration and plea of fraud taken by the plaintiff is not 
tenable. Accordingly, the plaintiff could have challenged 
the sale deed within three years from its registration i.e. 
26.05.2008. However, the case in hand was filed on 
12.10.2012. At this juncture, I may also observe that the 
provision for condonation of delay under Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act, 1963 does not apply to suits. Therefore, 
162
Supreme Court Reports
the argument of plaintiff that he was not well and thereby 
prevented by a sufficient cause from filing the suit within 
prescribed time cannot be looked into. Consequently, the 
suit of the plaintiff is hopelessly barred by limitation.
21. It is further imperative to note that even if it is believed 
for the sake of arguments, that plaintiff paid the entire 
sale consideration for purchasing the land which is 
subject matter of the sale deed under challenge, it is duly 
established as already discussed above that plaintiff was 
aware of the fact that defendant was recorded owner in 
possession of the land to the extent of half share since 
the very beginning. Thus, when the plaintiff allowed the 
defendant to get his name incorporated in the sale deed 
as owner of half share of the land, the stand of plaintiff that 
he is the absolute owner of the land because he paid the 
entire sale consideration, is hit by Section 4 of the Benami 
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988. It is also pertinent to 
mention that the law laid down in Manoj Arora Vs. Mamta 
Arora (supra) which is relied upon by the learned counsel 
for the plaintiff does not apply to the present lis as in that 
case the plaintiff had purchased the property in the name 
of his wife and in these circumstances it was ruled that bar 
of Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act will not apply to 
the claim of husband over the suit property. However, in 
the instant case the plaintiff and defendant are not husband 
and wife or otherwise closely related to each other.
22. In view of above discussion and peculiar facts and 
circumstances of the present lis, the citations relied upon 
by the plaintiff are distinguishable and not applicable to the 
case in hand and no decree as prayed for can be passed 
in favour of plaintiff. Consequently, the suit of plaintiff has 
rightly been dismissed by the Trial Court. Resultantly, no 
interference in this appeal is warranted and the appeal 
is dismissed. Parties are left to bear their own costs. 
Decree-sheet be prepared accordingly. Trial Court record 
along with copy of this Judgment be sent to Trial Court 
for information. Appeal file be consigned to record room.”
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
163
Santosh Devi v. Sunder
12.	 The petitioner preferred second appeal before the High Court. The 
High Court dismissed the second appeal holding as under:-
“6. A registered sale deed executed in favour of two 
purchasers cannot be modified/rectified merely on account 
of the fact that the payment has been made from the 
plaintiff’s account, particularly, when they were working 
together as the property brokers. Only they are aware 
of the equation between them. In any case, the plaintiff 
may have a right to recover the amount, if the respondent 
has failed to pay his contribution. However, that will be 
subject to the rendition of accounts between the plaintiff 
and the respondents. As regards the second argument, 
it would be noted that Order VII Rule 6 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure,1908, provides for exemption arising out 
of the Limitation Law. It does not provide for extending 
the period of limitation or condonation in filing the suit. It 
only suggests that the ground of exemption from limitation 
should be specifically pleaded in the plaint. Order VII 
Rule 6 does not provide a remedy, it merely lays down 
a procedure.”
13.	 In such circumstances, referred to above, the petitioner is here before 
this Court with the present petition.
14.	 We heard Ms. Srishti Singla, the learned counsel appearing for the 
petitioner at length.
15.	 The learned counsel pressed into service two submissions. The first 
submission is with regard to Order VII Rule 6 of the Civil Procedure 
Code, 1908 (for short “the CPC”). The Order VII Rule 6 of CPC 
reads thus:-
“7. PLAINT 
6. Grounds of exemption from limitation law.—Where the 
suit is instituted after the expiration of the period prescribed 
by the law of limitation, the plaint shall show the ground 
upon which exemption from such law is claimed:
Provided that the Court may permit the plaintiff to claim 
exemption from the law of limitation on any ground not 
164
Supreme Court Reports
set out in the plaint, if such ground is not inconsistent with 
the grounds set out in the plaint.”
16.	 The second submission is with respect to Section 17 of the Limitation 
Act. Section 17 reads thus:-
“17. Effect of fraud or mistake.—(1) Where, in the case 
of any suit or application for which a period of limitation 
is prescribed by this Act,—
(a) the suit or application is based upon the fraud of the 
defendant or respondent or his agent; or 
(b) the knowledge of the right or title on which a suit or 
application is founded is concealed by the fraud of any 
such person as aforesaid; or 
(c) the suit or application is for relief from the consequences 
of a mistake; or 
(d) where any document necessary to establish the right of 
the plaintiff or applicant has been fraudulently concealed 
from him; 
the period of limitation shall not begin to run until the plaintiff 
or applicant has discovered the fraud or the mistake or 
could, with reasonable diligence, have discovered it, or in 
the case of a concealed document, until the plaintiff or the 
applicant first had the means of producing the concealed 
document or compelling its production: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall enable any suit 
to be instituted or application to be made to recover or 
enforce any charge against, or set aside any transaction 
affecting, any property which— 
(i) in the case of fraud, has been purchased for valuable 
consideration by a person who was not a party to the fraud 
and did not at the time of the purchase know, or have 
reason to believe, that any fraud had been committed, or 
(ii) in the case of mistake, has been purchased for valuable 
consideration subsequently to the transaction in which the 
mistake was made, by a person who did not know, or have 
reason to believe, that the mistake had been made, or 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
165
Santosh Devi v. Sunder
(iii) in the case of a concealed document, has been 
purchased for valuable consideration by a person who 
was not a party to the concealment and, did not at the 
time of purchase know, or have reason to believe, that 
the document had been concealed. 
(2) Where a judgment-debtor has, by fraud or force, 
prevented the execution of a decree or order within the 
period of limitation, the court may, on the application of the 
judgment-creditor made after the expiry of the said period 
extend the period for execution of the decree or order: 
Provided that such application is made within one year 
from the date of the discovery of the fraud or the cessation 
of force, as the case may be.”
17.	 To appreciate the findings arrived at by the Courts below, we must 
first see on whom the onus of proof lies. The record reveals that the 
disputed document is a registered sale deed. It is not in dispute that 
the petitioner has signed the sale deed. We are, therefore, guided by 
the settled legal principle that a document is presumed to be genuine 
if the same is registered, as held by this Court in Prem Singh and 
Ors. v. Birbal and Ors. reported in (2006) 5 SCC 353. The relevant 
portion of the said decision reads as below:
“27. There is a presumption that a registered document 
is validly executed. A registered document, therefore, 
prima facie would be valid in law. The onus of proof, thus, 
would be on a person who leads evidence to rebut the 
presumption. In the instant case, Respondent 1 has not 
been able to rebut the said presumption.”
(Emphasis supplied) 
In view thereof, in the present case, the initial onus was on the 
plaintiff, who had challenged the sale deed.
18.	 When fraud is alleged against the defendant, it is an acknowledged 
rule of pleading that the plaintiff must set forth the particulars of the 
fraud which he alleges. In the present case, fraud is alleged as a 
ground upon which the plaintiff justifies the institution of the suit long 
after the expiry of the period normally allowed for the institution of the 
166
Supreme Court Reports
suit. Though no specific reference to the provisions of Section 17 of 
the Limitation Act, 1963 (for short, ‘the Limitation Act’) is made in the 
plaint, it is manifest that the pleading proceeds upon the hypothesis 
that the plaintiff had also contributed along with the defendant in 
the purchase of the subject property and at the time of the sale, 
the plaintiff was entitled to 50% of the sale consideration. In other 
words, the fraud was played upon the plaintiff to sign the sale deed 
and thereby transfer the subject property. The requirement of Order 
VII Rule 6, Civil Procedure Code, are clear. It is necessary that the 
plaint should show the ground upon which the exemption from the 
normal period of limitation is claimed. The question is whether the 
plaint in this case fulfils the requirements of law. As observed by 
Lord Selborne in Walling Ford vs. Mutul Society reported in (1880) 
5 A.C. 685:
“With regard to fraud, if there be any principle which is 
perfectly well settled, it is that general allegations however 
strong be the words in which they are stated, are insufficient 
even to amount to an averment of fraud of which any Court 
ought to take notice.”
19.	 It is not the mere use of general words such as ‘fraud’ that can serve 
as the foundation for the plea. Such expressions are quite ineffective 
to give the legal basis in the absence of particular statements of fact 
which alone can furnish the requisite basis for the action.
20.	 Order VII Rule 6 uses the words “the plaint shall show the ground 
upon which exemption from such law is claimed”. The exemption 
provided under Sections 4 to 20 of the Limitation Act are based on 
certain facts and events. Section 17, with which we are concerned, 
provides for a fresh period of limitation, which is founded on certain 
facts.
21.	 The matter can also be looked at from a different angle. Assuming for 
the moment that the defendant was a party to the fraud as alleged 
relating to the sale transaction, whether the same by itself is sufficient 
to save limitation under Section 17 of the Limitation Act. We are of 
the opinion that the fraud relating to the sale transaction as alleged 
itself would not help the plaintiff in getting over the plea of limitation 
in this case. As already discussed, under Section 17 of the Limitation 
Act, the plaintiff should have been kept out of knowledge of his right 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
167
Santosh Devi v. Sunder
to sue by means of fraud. We are of the opinion that the alleged 
fraud relating to the sale transaction itself has nothing to do with the 
question viz., that the plaintiff had been kept out of knowledge of his 
right to file a suit for cancellation of the sale deed because of fraud.
22.	 In overall view of the matter, we are of the view that no error, not to 
speak of any error of law, could be said to have been committed by 
the High Court in passing the impugned judgment and order.
23.	 The Special Leave Petition stands, accordingly, dismissed.
24.	 Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Special Leave Petition dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey