[2025] 3 S.C.R. 303 : 2025 INSC 308
Rajnish Singh @ Soni 
v. 
State of U.P. and Another
(Criminal Appeal No. 1055 of 2025)
03 March 2025
[Vikram Nath and Sandeep Mehta,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to the liability of the appellant to be prosecuted 
for committing rape upon the complainant by giving her a false 
promise of marriage; and the correctness of the order passed by 
the High Court dismissing the petition seeking the quashing of 
the criminal proceedings arising out of the chargesheet u/ss.376, 
384, 323, 504, 506 IPC.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.376, 384, 323, 504, 506 – Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.482 – Criminal proceeding 
against the appellant for having sexually exploited/assaulted 
the complainant for over a period of 16 years, based on a false 
promise of marriage – Appellant chargesheeted u/ss.376, 384, 
323, 504, 506 – Appellant sought quashing of proceedings – 
Rejected by the High Court – Justification: 
Held: Accused is not liable for the offence of rape if the victim 
has wilfully agreed to maintain sexual relations – Complainant’s 
allegations seem to be well-arranged story – Complainant, 
being a highly qualified major woman continued unabatedly in a 
consensual intimate sexual relationship with the appellant over 
a period of 16 years, which is sufficient to conclude that there 
was never an element of force or deceit in the relationship – It 
cannot be said that the appellant is liable to be prosecuted for 
having sexually exploited/assaulted the complainant based on a 
false promise of marriage – Allegations of the complainant are 
full of material contradictions and are ex  facie unbelievable – 
Throughout the prolonged period of 16 years, the complainant 
kept completely quiet about the alleged sexual abuse, meted 
out to her by the appellant until she learnt that the appellant 
had married another woman – Further in complete contradiction 
* Author
304
to the case setup in the FIR, the complainant has on many 
occasions portrayed herself to be the wife of the appellant and 
thus, evidently, they lived together as man and wife – Long gap 
of 16 years between the first alleged act of sexual intercourse, 
continued relations for one and a half decade till the filing of 
the FIR convinces that it is a clear case of a love affair/live in 
relationship gone sour – Allowing the prosecution of the appellant 
to continue for the offences alleged, would be nothing short of a 
gross abuse of the process of law– Impugned order quashed and 
set aside – Impugned FIR and proceedings arising thereunder 
quashed. [Paras 21, 24, 25, 27, 35, 37, 39]
Case Law Cited
Mahesh Damu Khare v. State of Maharashtra, 2024 SCC OnLine 
SC 3471; Prashant v. State (NCT of Delhi) 2024 SCC OnLine 
SC 3375; Deepak Gulati v. State of Haryana [2013] 6 SCR 544 : 
(2013) 7 SCC 675; Shivashankar v. State of Karnataka (2019) 18 
SCC 204 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Quashing of criminal proceedings; Forcible sexual intercourse; 
Promise of marriage; Obscene video; Causing miscarriage; Threat 
of making the obscene video/pictures viral; Forcibly taking money; 
Agreement of marriage; Relationship between two consenting 
adults; Love affair subsisting over one and a half decade; Gross 
abuse of process of law; Physical relationship directly traceable 
to false promise; Vitiation of consent under misconception of fact; 
Misconception of marriage; Secret marriage ceremony; Distinction 
between rape and consensual intercourse; Living together as man 
and wife; Ex facie unbelievable allegations.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1055 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 24.04.2023 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad In A482 No. 43177 of 2022
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
305
Rajnish Singh @ Soni v. State of U.P. and Another
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Dr. Purvish Malkan, Sr. Adv., Pradeep Kumar Yadav, Vishal Thakre, 
Ms. Anjale Kumari, Ms. Manshu Sharma, Dinesh Satyapal Sehgal, 
Aditya Yadav, Sanjeev Malhotra.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Ankit Goel, Vikas Bansal, Harshit Singhal, Nitin Meshram, Saurabh 
Singh, Rishi Raj Singh, Ranbir Singh Yadav.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Mehta, J.
1.	
Heard.
2.	
Leave granted.
3.	
The appellant herein has preferred the instant appeal by special leave, 
assailing the order dated 24th April, 2023, passed by the learned Single 
Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad1 dismissing the 
petition filed by the appellant, being Application U/S 482 No. 43177 
of 2022, for quashment of the proceedings of Criminal Case No. 
1246 of 2022 arising out of chargesheet in Case Crime No. 269 of 
2022 under Sections 376, 384, 323, 504, 506 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 18602 at Police Station Bakewar, District Etawah.
4.	
Brief facts relevant and essential for the disposal of the present 
appeal are reproduced hereinbelow.
5.	
Ms. A, respondent No. 2-complainant,3 lodged an FIR in Case 
Crime No. 269 of 2022 dated 5th July, 2022, against the appellant 
at Police Station Bakewar, District Etawah alleging, inter alia, that 
she is a resident of village Kudaria and was qualified with degrees 
in M.Com and B.Ed. and since 2008, she had been serving on the 
post of Lecturer in AFS Bhemora College in Lucknow. 
1	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘High Court’.
2	
Hereinafter, being referred to as ‘IPC’.
3	
For short, ‘complainant’.
306
6.	
It was alleged that the accused, appellant herein, sometime in the 
year 2006, sneaked into the house of the complainant in the night and 
subjected her to forcible sexual intercourse. She was neither able to 
scream nor could call out for help as the appellant had gagged her 
mouth due to which her parents, who were also present in the house, 
were unable to get a wind of the incident. She warned the appellant 
that she would disclose about the incident to her family members, 
upon which the appellant apologised profoundly and requested 
her to remain quiet and gave her an assurance of marriage. The 
complainant, therefore, neither lodged any complaint nor did she take 
other action in respect of the incident of sexual assault upon her.
7.	
The appellant initially, was working as a constable in the police 
department. Later, in 2009, he joined as a Clerk in the State Bank 
of India in Dhani branch of Maharajganj district. In the intervening 
period, the intimacy between the appellant and the complainant 
continued to flourish. The appellant had once called the complainant to 
Maharajganj, where he made her to consume some intoxicant mixed 
with ENO, without her knowledge, which made her semi-conscious. 
Taking advantage, the appellant subjected her to forcible sexual 
intercourse. He not only video-graphed the offending acts but later, 
showed it to the complainant when she regained consciousness. The 
complainant, fearing retribution in society, did not share information 
about the said incident with anyone. Subsequently, the complainant 
became pregnant which was confirmed with a pregnancy detection 
kit. When this information came to the knowledge of the appellant, he 
mixed some medication in water and made the complainant to drink 
it in order to cause miscarriage. Since the appellant continuously 
blackmailed and threatened the complainant using the obscene 
video, she did not tell anyone about the abortion.
8.	
The complainant had initially gone to meet the appellant out of her 
own free will, but the appellant, later on, pressurised her under 
the threat of making the obscene video/pictures viral. She would 
therefore, meet him only with the objective of collecting the video 
from him so that she could delete it. In 2015, the appellant called 
the complainant to Pratapgarh and threatened her that if she did not 
accede to his demands, he would make the video viral. 
9.	
Additionally, it was also alleged in the FIR that the appellant forcibly 
took money from the complainant on a number of occasions. In 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
307
Rajnish Singh @ Soni v. State of U.P. and Another
2011, the appellant had taken a cheque of Rs.94,000/- from the 
complainant, however, he did not return a dime to her. As the 
appellant threatened her by using the obscene video of intimate 
relations that he possessed, she did not complain to anyone, about 
the aforesaid criminal acts that had taken place with her between 
the years 2006 to 2021.
10.	 In 2021, a woman, named Namrata, entered into the life of the 
appellant, whereupon the complainant filed a complaint with Lucknow 
Commissionerate. However, she was advised to go to Etawah Police 
Station. Thereupon, she lodged a complaint against the appellant at 
the One Stop Centre, Lalitpur on 23rd March, 2022 which was closed 
based upon an agreement entered into between the complainant 
and the appellant, wherein they both agreed to marry each other. 
However, on 22nd April, 2022, the appellant resiled from his promise 
and married Namrata. When the factum of appellant’s marriage 
came to the complainant’s knowledge, she immediately shared the 
information of the illegal acts and incidents of sexual assaults by the 
appellant with her family members and the people of her community. 
Later, when she decided to take police action, the appellant along 
with his brother-Ashwani and father-Rajbahadur made an attempt to 
cause harm to her parents. On 1st May, 2022, the appellant barged 
into her house, in the presence of her parents, and threatened that 
she would be killed if she continued with the legal cases filed by her.
11.	 Based on the above allegations, an FIR4 dated 5th July, 2022, came to 
be registered against the appellant for the offences punishable under 
Sections 313, 376, 384, 323, 504 and 506 of IPC and investigation 
was commenced. Almost similar allegations were set in the statements 
of the complainant recorded under Sections 161 and 164 of Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 19735 and in addition, she further stated that 
upon discovering that the appellant had developed relations with 
Namrata, she had disclosed everything to her but in spite thereof, 
Namrata got married to appellant on 22nd April, 2022. 
12.	 Consequent to the completion of the investigation, the police submitted 
a report under Section 173(2) CrPC dated 29th September, 2022, 
against the appellant for the offences punishable under Sections 
4	
FIR No. 269 of 2022.
5	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘CrPC’.
308
376, 384, 323, 504 and 506 IPC in the Court of learned Additional 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court No.-04, Etawah. Vide order dated 
10th November, 2022, the learned Magistrate took cognizance for the 
above offences and issued summons to the appellant. Aggrieved, the 
appellant filed a criminal petition under Section 482 CrPC seeking 
quashing of the proceedings in Criminal Case No. 1246 of 2022 in the 
High Court. The quashing petition stands rejected vide order dated 
24th April, 2023, which is assailed in this appeal by special leave.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT: -	
13.	 Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently and fervently urged that 
the entire case as set out in the impugned FIR and the chargesheet 
is false and cooked up. The complainant is a major educated girl, who 
was fully conscious of the consequences of the intimate relationship 
which flourished between her and the appellant for a period of almost 
16 years. The acts of repeated intimacy and sexual relations were 
totally consensual in nature and were not established under any 
false promise, threat, duress or coercion. The appellant all along 
intended to marry the complainant. He thus, urged that the case of a 
prolonged voluntary relationship/love affair between two consenting 
adults has been given a colour of forcible sexual intercourse with 
oblique purposes and motive. 
14.	 Learned counsel further submitted that, as a matter of fact, the 
appellant and the complainant had performed the rituals of marriage 
with each other during the subsistence of their love affair which 
extended to over one and a half decade. However, the relationship 
went sour leading to the strife and culminated into the FIR. In this 
regard, he placed reliance on the application dated 25th May, 2022, 
given by the complainant to the Senior Superintendent of Police, 
Etawah and urged that the said application was filed prior to the 
lodging of the FIR, wherein the complainant had categorically 
mentioned her marital status as the wife of the appellant. She had 
also alleged in the complaint that her husband, i.e., the appellant 
herein, had refused to keep her with him.
15.	 Learned counsel urged that it is a case of voluntary sexual relationship 
between two consenting adults and hence, the proceedings of the 
criminal case registered against the appellant for the aforesaid 
offences, tantamount to a gross abuse of the process of law and 
therefore, the same deserve to be quashed.
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
309
Rajnish Singh @ Soni v. State of U.P. and Another
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS: -
16.	 Per contra, learned counsel for the State and learned counsel 
appearing for the complainant have vehemently opposed the 
submissions advanced by the counsel for the appellant. They urged 
that the appellant won over the confidence of the complainant by 
giving her false assurances of marriage and based on such promise 
he sexually exploited her, when in fact, he had no intentions to marry 
her. After subjecting the complainant to forcible sexual intercourse 
repeatedly over a period of almost 15 years, the appellant ditched 
her and married another woman.
17.	 Learned counsel further contended that the appellant had also 
recorded intimate videos and pictures of the complainant and 
blackmailed her under the threat of making them viral. They, urged 
that the High Court was justified in dismissing the criminal petition filed 
by the appellant and hence, sought rejection of the present appeal.
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION: -
18.	 We have given our anxious consideration to the submissions 
advanced at the bar and have carefully gone through the impugned 
judgment and the material placed on record.
19.	 The allegation that the appellant spiked the complainant’s drink and 
caused her miscarriage stands refuted as the Investigation Officer 
has deleted Section 313 IPC while submitting the police report 
under Section 173(2) CrPC dated 29th September, 2022. Further, 
Investigation Officer also concluded that the involvement of the other 
co-accused, i.e., the relatives of the appellant who were arraigned 
by the complainant in the FIR, was not substantiated by any reliable 
evidence and thus, the chargesheet was only submitted against the 
appellant.
20.	 Therefore, we have to consider whether in the facts and circumstances 
of the present case, the appellant is liable to be prosecuted for 
committing rape upon the complainant by giving her a false promise 
of marriage.
21.	 There is no dispute that the complainant, a highly qualified female, was 
major at the time when her relationship with the appellant sprouted. 
The first act of sexual intercourse between the appellant and the 
complainant is alleged to have taken place in the year 2006 and 
310
that too in her own house. However, at that time, the complainant 
did not make any complaint to anyone, including her own family 
members, that the appellant had established sexual relations with 
her based on an express promise to marry her in future. It needs 
to be highlighted that the complainant categorically came out with 
a case in the FIR that the first act of sexual relation between her 
and the appellant (albeit forcible as per the complainant) took place 
in her own house where her parents were also present. The very 
manner in which this incident is said to have taken place, puts the 
case of the complainant under serious doubt. It is difficult to swallow 
that the complainant, a well-qualified major girl, was subjected to 
forcible sexual intercourse by an outsider in her own house where 
her parents were present and still, they did not get a whiff about 
the incident. Thus, the complainant’s allegations seem to be a well-
orchestrated story and nothing beyond that.
22.	 It was nearly 16 years since the first incident, in a highly belated FIR, 
that the complainant alleged, for the first time, that the appellant, 
who was on friendly terms with her, forcibly subjected her to sexual 
intercourse in the year 2006. Further, she also stated that though she 
initially protested to this act and intended to report the matter to the 
police, she changed her mind trusting the appellant’s assurance that 
he loved her and if she refrained from spilling the beans, he would 
marry her. Under this guise, the appellant continued to establish 
sexual relations with the complainant.
23.	 Admittedly, the appellant got a job in the year 2006 as a Constable 
in the police department and was posted in a different town. The 
complainant alleged that whenever the appellant would visit the 
village Kudaria, he would establish sexual relations with her under 
the promise of marriage. However, she has not clarified or elaborated 
when and where these acts of fornication took place. In the year 
2008, the complainant came to be appointed as a Lecturer in the 
Kendriya Vidyalaya whereas, the appellant in the year 2009, got a 
job as a Clerk in the State Bank of India. As per the complainant, in 
the year 2009, the appellant called her to his residence in the town 
Farinda, Anand Nagar, where he mixed certain intoxicating substance 
in her drink and thereafter, subjected her to sexual assault and 
while she was in the state of drug induced stupor, he recorded her 
obscene videos and pictures. He, thereafter, sent offensive messages 
to the complainant on WhatsApp, threatening that he would make 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
311
Rajnish Singh @ Soni v. State of U.P. and Another
her videos and pictures viral unless she continued to have sexual 
relations with him. 
24.	 It does not stand to reason that when the intimate relations were 
continuing between the parties without any hitch for more than three 
years, then why would the appellant be impelled to take the trouble 
of spiking the drink of the complainant in order to establish sexual 
relations with her. 
25.	 It is hard to believe that the complainant, being a highly qualified and 
well-placed major woman, kept on bending to the demands of the 
appellant for a period of nearly 16 years without raising any protest 
to any quarter that the appellant was exploiting her sexually under 
the pretext of a false promise of marriage. The prolonged period of 
16 years during which the sexual relations continued unabatedly 
between the parties, is sufficient to conclude that there was never an 
element of force or deceit in the relationship. The complainant and 
the appellant were posted at different places pursuing their respective 
jobs. On a few occasions, the appellant would visit the complainant 
at her place whereas on other occasions, the complainant was 
called by the appellant to his house where these acts of fornication 
continued unabatedly till the year 2020/2021. It is almost impossible 
to swallow the version of the complainant that for the entire period 
of 16 years, she unreservedly allowed the appellant to subject her 
to repeated acts of sexual intercourse under the impression that 
the accused would on someday act upon his promise of marriage.
26.	 In the case of Mahesh Damu Khare v. State of Maharashtra,6 this 
Court held that to make a man, accused of having sexual relationship 
by making a false promise of marriage, criminally liable, the physical 
relationship must be traceable directly to the false promise made 
and it must not be qualified by other circumstances or consideration. 
In a situation where the woman knowingly maintains the physical 
relationship for a prolonged period, it cannot be said with certainty 
that the said physical relationship was purely because of alleged 
promise made by the accused to marry her.
27.	 In conclusion, the Court held that unless it can be shown that the 
physical relationship was purely because of the promise of marriage 
6	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 3471
312
and without being influenced by any other consideration, it cannot be 
said that there was vitiation of consent under misconception of fact. 
It was further held that even if it is assumed that a false promise of 
marriage was made to the complainant initially by the accused, the 
fact that the relationship continued for a period of nine long years 
would render the plea of the complainant that her consent for all 
these years was under misconception of the fact that the accused 
would marry her implausible.
28.	 In the case of Prashant v. State (NCT of Delhi),7 this Court observed 
that it is inconceivable that the complainant would continue to meet the 
accused or maintain a prolonged association or physical relationship 
with him in the absence of voluntary consent on her part. 
29.	 Testing the facts of the case at hand, on the touchstone of the above 
precedents, it is clear that the complainant, being a highly qualified 
major woman continued in a consensual intimate sexual relationship 
with the appellant over a period of 16 years. At some point in time, the 
relationship went sour leading to the filing of the FIR. No reasonable 
man would accept the version that the complainant allowed the 
accused to establish sexual relations with her over a period of 16 
years purely under the misconception of marriage. 
30.	 There is no dispute that from the year 2006 onwards, the complainant 
and the appellant were residing in different towns. The complainant 
is an educated woman and there was no pressure whatsoever upon 
her which could have prevented her from filing a police complaint 
against the accused if she felt that the sexual relations were under 
duress or were being established under a false assurance of 
marriage. On many occasions, she even portrayed herself to be 
the wife of the appellant thereby, dispelling the allegation that the 
intention of the appellant was to cheat her right from the inception of 
the relationship. We cannot remain oblivious to the fact that it was 
mostly the complainant who used to travel to meet the appellant at 
his place of posting. Therefore, we are convinced that the relationship 
between the complainant and appellant was consensual without the 
existence of any element of deceit or misconception.
31.	 Further, the application filed by the complainant at One Stop Center, 
Lalitpur on 23rd March, 2022, makes it abundantly clear that she 
7	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 3375
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
313
Rajnish Singh @ Soni v. State of U.P. and Another
was in a consensual relationship with the appellant since 2006. It 
is alleged in the complaint that when she had proposed that they 
should marry and live together, the appellant physically abused her 
and beat her up. If at all there was an iota of truth in this allegation 
then the FIR should have been registered immediately after this 
incident. However, it is only when it came to the knowledge of the 
complainant that the appellant was getting married to another woman, 
in an attempt to stop his marriage, she filed aforesaid complaint at 
the One Stop Center wherein she also admitted that she was equally 
guilty as the appellant and therefore, his marriage must be stopped.
32.	 Further, on the perusal of the statement made by the complainant 
under Section 161 CrPC, it is evident that she came to know about 
the relations between the appellant and Namrata in the year 2020-
2021. Thus, once the complainant was aware that the appellant had 
broken the ties with her and was involved in a relationship with another 
woman, there was no reason for her to hold back from filing the FIR.
33.	 To the contrary, the complainant has herself set up a case that there 
was a secret marriage ceremony between her and the appellant. 
Therefore, in our opinion, even if the allegations made by the 
complainant are accepted on their face value, it is evident that 
the appellant and the complainant were in a long-standing live-in 
relationship during which they even performed marriage rituals albeit 
informal in nature. 
34.	 It is trite that there is a distinction between rape and consensual 
intercourse. This Court in Deepak Gulati v. State of Haryana,8 
differentiated between a mere breach of promise and not fulfilling a 
false promise and held that an accused will only be liable if the Courts 
concludes that his intentions are mala fide and he has clandestine 
motives. The relevant extract is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“21. Consent may be express or implied, coerced or 
misguided, obtained willingly or through deceit. Consent 
is an act of reason, accompanied by deliberation, the 
mind weighing, as in a balance, the good and evil on 
each side. There is a clear distinction between rape 
and consensual sex and in a case like this, the court 
8	
(2013) 7 SCC 675
314
must very carefully examine whether the accused 
had actually wanted to marry the victim, or had 
mala fide motives, and had made a false promise to 
this effect only to satisfy his lust, as the latter falls 
within the ambit of cheating or deception. There is 
a distinction between the mere breach of a promise, 
and not fulfilling a false promise. Thus, the court must 
examine whether there was made, at an early stage a 
false promise of marriage by the accused; and whether 
the consent involved was given after wholly understanding 
the nature and consequences of sexual indulgence. 
There may be a case where the prosecutrix agrees to 
have sexual intercourse on account of her love and 
passion for the accused, and not solely on account 
of misrepresentation made to her by the accused, 
or where an accused on account of circumstances 
which he could not have foreseen, or which were 
beyond his control, was unable to marry her, despite 
having every intention to do so. Such cases must be 
treated differently. An accused can be convicted for 
rape only if the court reaches a conclusion that the 
intention of the accused was mala fide, and that he 
had clandestine motives.
. . .
24. Hence, it is evident that there must be adequate 
evidence to show that at the relevant time i.e. at 
the initial stage itself, the accused had no intention 
whatsoever, of keeping his promise to marry the 
victim. There may, of course, be circumstances, when a 
person having the best of intentions is unable to marry the 
victim owing to various unavoidable circumstances. The 
“failure to keep a promise made with respect to a future 
uncertain date, due to reasons that are not very clear 
from the evidence available, does not always amount to 
misconception of fact. In order to come within the meaning 
of the term “misconception of fact”, the fact must have 
an immediate relevance”. Section 90 IPC cannot be 
called into aid in such a situation, to pardon the act 
of a girl in entirety, and fasten criminal liability on 
[2025] 3 S.C.R. 
315
Rajnish Singh @ Soni v. State of U.P. and Another
the other, unless the court is assured of the fact that 
from the very beginning, the accused had never really 
intended to marry her.”
(emphasis supplied)
35.	 It is, therefore, clear that the accused is not liable for the offence 
of rape if the victim has wilfully agreed to maintain sexual relations. 
The Court has also recognised that a prosecutrix can agree to 
have sexual intercourse on account of her love and passion for the 
accused.	  
36.	 This Court in Shivashankar v. State of Karnataka,9 had quashed 
criminal proceedings on the ground that it is difficult to hold sexual 
intercourse in the course of a relationship, which continued for eight 
years, as ‘rape’ especially when the complainant therein had alleged 
that they lived together as man and wife. The relevant extract is 
reproduced hereinbelow: -
“4. In the facts and circumstances of the present case, it is 
difficult to sustain the charges levelled against the appellant 
who may have possibly, made a false promise of marriage 
to the complainant. It is, however, difficult to hold sexual 
intercourse in the course of a relationship which has 
continued for eight years, as “rape” especially in the 
face of the complainant’s own allegation that they 
lived together as man and wife.”
(emphasis supplied)
37.	 Thus, by no stretch of imagination, can this Court be convinced that 
present is a case wherein the appellant is liable to be prosecuted 
for having sexually exploited/assaulted the complainant based on 
a false promise of marriage. The allegations of the complainant 
are full of material contradictions and are ex facie unbelievable. 
Throughout the prolonged period of 16 years, the complainant kept 
completely quiet about the alleged sexual abuse, meted out to her by 
the appellant until she learnt that the appellant had married another 
woman. Further in complete contradiction to the case setup in the 
9	
(2019) 18 SCC 204
316
FIR, the complainant has on many occasions portrayed herself to 
be the wife of the appellant and thus, evidently, they lived together 
as man and wife. Additionally, the long gap of 16 years between the 
first alleged act of sexual intercourse, continued relations for one 
and a half decade till the filing of the FIR convinces us that it is a 
clear case of a love affair/live in relationship gone sour. 
38.	 In this background, we are of the opinion that allowing the prosecution 
of the appellant to continue for the offences alleged, under Sections 
376, 384, 323, 504 and 506 IPC would be nothing short of a gross 
abuse of the process of law.
39.	 The order dated 24th April, 2023, passed by the High Court of Judicature 
at Allahabad is quashed and set aside and as a consequence, the 
impugned FIR No. 269 of 2022 and all the consequent proceedings 
sought to be taken thereunder against the appellant are also quashed 
and set aside. 
40.	 The appeal is allowed accordingly.
41.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain