[2025] 5 S.C.R. 369 : 2025 INSC 425
Jomon K.K. 
v. 
Shajimon P. & Ors. Etc.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 4499-4500 of 2025)
02 April 2025
[Dipankar Datta* and Manmohan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the appellant who did not hold a current Lascar’s licence 
but was the holder of a Syrang’s licence (superior to Lascar’s 
licence) could have been considered qualified to participate in the 
recruitment process for the post of “Boat Lascar” under Kerala 
State Water Transport Department and appointed as “Boat Lascar”.
Headnotes†
Special Rules of 1975 for the Kerala State Water Transport 
Subordinate Service (Operating Wing) – r.6 – Appellant who 
did not hold a current Lascar’s licence, as required, but was 
the holder of a Syrang’s licence (superior to Lascar’s licence), 
if was qualified to participate in the recruitment process for 
the post of “Boat Lascar” and appointed as “Boat Lascar” – 
Appellant’s appointment as “Boat Lascar” was cancelled:
Held: The advertisement did not require anything else other than 
what the Special Rules require – Possession of a current Lascar’s 
licence was an essential qualification for the post of Lascar – This 
was laid down in the qualifications required; which when read with 
r.6 shows that apart from those having a current Lascar’s licence, 
none else was eligible – The word “current” is significant as the 
Rules insist on a subsisting licence, i.e., a certificate of competency, 
which is valid and operative during the time the last date for 
receiving applications intervene – However, the appellant did not 
have the ‘current’ Lascar’s licence on the last date for receiving 
applications – On a conjoint reading of r.6, Special Rules and the 
advertisement, both mentioning a particular qualification, i.e., a 
current Lascar’s licence, which each aspirant had to possess for 
being considered eligible to participate in the process of selection, 
thereby creating a distinct class, it was aspirants falling in such class 
alone who could have applied for being considered – Thus, any 
aspirant, even though possessing a Syrang’s licence or a Driver’s 
* Author
370
Supreme Court Reports
licence not being part of such distinct class, could not have been 
considered eligible – Furthermore, not only the qualifications but 
the nature of duties required to be performed and the nature of 
service to be rendered by a Lascar and a Syrang are different – 
Merely because the post of Lascar is a feeder post for promotion to 
the post of Syrang does not per se make the holder of a Syrang’s 
licence qualified for the job of a Lascar – High Court rightly held 
that KPSC could not have included candidates with licences other 
than a Lascar’s licence in the “Ranked List” and proceeded to 
recommend those candidates for appointment – An appointment 
made contrary to the statutory rule would be void – On merits, no 
legally protected right of the appellant having been affected by 
the impugned action, he has no valid claim. [Paras 22-24, 28-31]
Public employment – Selection – Exclusion of aspirants from 
selection process, if justified – Factors to be considered – 
Whether overqualification can be a disqualification:
Held: Whether or not the action of the employer to exclude an 
aspirant from the process of selection (on the ground that either 
he is over qualified for a particular post or has qualifications which, 
being over and above what is ordained by statutory rules or rules 
framed under the proviso to Rule 309 of the Constitution, does 
not match the qualification specifically required) is justified has 
to be decided considering the rules governing the selection, the 
qualifications prescribed, the nature of duty to be performed, the 
nature of service to be rendered and a host of other factors – At 
times, the employer’s need to have the right people at the right 
place, and not always the higher qualified, has to be conceded – 
There are decisions holding that over-qualification cannot be a 
disqualification since such an approach amounts to discouraging 
the acquisition of qualifications on the one hand and on the other, 
such an approach could be seen as arbitrary, discriminatory and 
not in national interest – However, this principle cannot be put in 
a straitjacket imposing rigid or inflexible rules or norms – Each 
case has to be decided on its own peculiar facts and there can 
be no universally accepted rule that every time, a higher qualified 
candidate is to be preferred to a candidate who matches the 
essential qualification required for the post. [Para 36]
Public employment – Equality of opportunity – Absence of – 
Effect – Appellant did not hold a current Lascar’s licence, as 
required, but was the holder of a Syrang’s licence (superior to 
Lascar’s licence) – Appellant was appointed as “Boat Lascar” 
however, his appointment was later cancelled: 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
371
Jomon K.K. v. Shajimon P. & Ors. Etc.
Held: The aggrieved are all those who had similar or even better 
qualifications than the appellant but who had not applied for the 
post because they were unaware of the fact that persons not 
having a current Lascar’s licence would also be eligible to apply 
and compete in the process – Equality of opportunity in matters of 
public employment being a sine qua non for a fair and transparent 
selection process, such equality is conspicuously absent in the 
present case – If persons holding Syrang’s licence who are better 
equipped than persons holding Lascar’s licence are allowed to 
apply and participate in the process for appointment on the post 
of Lascar, the probability of the persons holding Lascar’s licence 
being outperformed by the persons holding Syrang’s licence would 
be quite high – In case all the vacant posts of Lascar are filled 
up by persons having Syrang’s licence but not having a current 
Lascar’s licence as per the statutory requirement, that would pose 
a real difficulty for persons not so fortunate and lacking in higher 
intelligence, abilities and intellect, as they would cease to have 
a level playing field of competing with other similarly qualified 
candidates, and left to compete with candidates having higher 
qualifications despite the zone of consideration having been 
specially carved out for holders of current Lascar’s licence – If, 
in case, all the vacant posts of Lascar are filled up by persons 
having Syrang’s licence and such holders of Syrang’s licence do 
not participate in the process for direct recruitment to the post of 
Syrang, it is fairly likely that the persons holding Lascar’s licence 
would never secure any public employment which could not have 
been the intention of a welfare State. [Paras 26, 27]
Constitution of India – Art. 142 – Exercise of power under – 
When not warranted – Discussed. [Paras 38-40]
Code of Civil Procedure – Non-joinder of a necessary party – 
Special Rules of 1975 for the Kerala State Water Transport 
Subordinate Service (Operating Wing) – Possession of a 
current Lascar’s licence was an essential qualification for 
posts of “Boat Lascar” – Appellant was the holder of a 
Syrang’s licence, license superior to Lascar’s Licence – 
He was selected however, while he was awaiting offer of 
appointment, applications were filed in the Administrative 
Tribunal inter alia to declare candidates not possessing current 
Lascar’s Licence on the last date for receipt of applications as 
ineligible – Appellant was not impleaded in the proceedings 
despite being a necessary party – Appellant appointed – 
Tribunal allowed applications – Appellant’s appointment was 
372
Supreme Court Reports
cancelled – Tribunal’s order challenged by the appellant, writ 
petitions dismissed by High Court:
Held: After appearing in a competitive examination and upon being 
selected, the appointees become an identified category and that 
if the rights of such appointees forming part of such identified 
category are to be affected by any determination, they should 
be impleaded in the proceedings as necessary parties – The  
non-joinder permits them to take the plea that the impugned order 
does not bind them – However, in the present case, the appellant 
did not immediately challenge the Tribunal’s order and challenged 
it only after his service came to be terminated – He took a chance 
of favourable consideration of his case by responding to the show 
cause – Having taken a chance and not being successful, he 
cannot, thereafter, succeed before this Court on the ground of his 
non-joinder as a necessary party. [Paras 17, 19]
Case Law Cited
Parvaiz Ahmed Parry v. State of Jammu and Kashmir [2015] 12 SCR 
810 : (2015) 17 SCC 709; Chandra Shekhar Singh and Others v. 
State of Jharkhand, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 595 – distinguished.
District Collector & Chairman, Vizianagaram Social Welfare 
Residential School Society v. M. Tripura Sundari Devi [1990] 2 
SCR 559 : (1990) 3 SCC 655 – held applicable.
Pramod Kumar v. U.P. Secondary Education Services Commission 
[2008] 4 SCR 559 : (2008) 7 SCC 153 – relied on.
Supreme Court Bar Association v. Union of India and Anr. [1998] 
2 SCR 795 : 1998 4 SCC 409; P.M. Latha and Anr. v. State of 
Kerala and Ors. [2003] 2 SCR 653 : (2003) 3 SCC 541; K. Ajit 
Babu v. Union of India [1997] Supp. 3 SCR 56 : (1997) 6 SCC 
473; Rama Rao v. M. G. Maheshwara Rao [2007] 9 SCR 446 : 
(2007) 14 SCC 54; Ranjan Kumar v. State of Bihar (2014) 16 SCC 
187; Kulwant Singh v. Dayaram [2014] 11 SCR 1053 : (2015) 3 
SCC 177; Ashok Kumar Sonkar v. Union of India [2007] 3 SCR 
95 : (2007) 4 SCC 54 – referred to.
List of Acts
Special Rules of 1975 for the Kerala State Water Transport 
Subordinate Service (Operating Wing); Kerala Inland Vessels 
Rules, 2010; Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958; 
Constitution of India; Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
373
Jomon K.K. v. Shajimon P. & Ors. Etc.
List of Keywords
Kerala Public Service Commission (KPSC); Kerala State Water 
Transport Department; Boat Lascar; Current lascar’s licence; 
“Current”; Syrang’s licence; Eligibility criteria; Essential qualification; 
Public employment; Recruitment process; Overqualification; 
Higher qualifications than what was required; Distinct class; 
Nature of duties; Nature of service; Statutory prescription; 
Equality of opportunity in public employment; Sine qua non; 
Fair and transparent selection process; Over-qualification not a 
disqualification; Lack of public employment opportunities; Over 
qualified candidates; Non-joinder of necessary parties; Identified 
category; Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 4499-4500 
of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 02.12.2019 of the High Court 
of Kerala at Ernakulam in OPKAT Nos. 153 and 154 of 2019
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
P. N Ravindran, Sr. Adv., P. S. Sudheer, Rishi Maheshwari,  
Ms. Anne Mathew, Bharat Sood, Jai Govind M J.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Nishe Rajen Shonker, Mrs. Anu K Joy, Alim Anvar, Santhosh K, Vipin 
Nair, Mohd Aman Alam, Aditya Narendranath, Mrs. M.B.Ramya, 
Mrs. Madhavi Yadav, Mrs. Deeksha Gupta.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Dipankar Datta, J.
The appeal
1.	
These appeals, by special leave, take exception to the common 
judgment and order dated 2nd December, 2019 of the High Court of 
Kerala at Ernakulam dismissing the appellant’s writ petitions.1
1	
O.P.(KAT) No. 153 of 2019 and O.P.(KAT) No. 154 of 2019
374
Supreme Court Reports
Facts
2.	
Facts giving rise to these appeals, which are not in dispute, are these:
a.	
An advertisement dated 17th October, 2012 was published by 
the Secretary of Kerala Public Service Commission2 inviting 
applications from interested candidates for filling up 12 vacant 
posts of “Boat Lascar” under the Kerala State Water Transport 
Department.3 The method of appointment was indicated as 
‘direct recruitment’ and the qualifications stipulated therein 
read as follows:
7. Qualifications:
(1) Literacy in Malayalam or Tamil or Kannada
(2) Possession of Current Lascar’s Licence
Note :- Candidates should possess current Lascar’s Licence 
on the last date for receipt of applications, during Practical Test 
and Interview also.
b.	
Incidentally, in terms of the Special Rules of 19754 for the 
Kerala State Water Transport Subordinate Service (Operating 
Wing),5 the service would consist of 3 classes of officers. While 
Class I comprised 2 categories, Classes II and III comprised 3 
categories, viz. Category 1, Category 2 and Category 3. 
Syrang, Driver and Lascar are listed at Categories 1, 2 and 3, 
respectively, of Class III. In terms of the Schedule appended 
to the Special Rules, the post of Syrang can be filled up either 
by direct recruitment or by promotion from among Lascars in 
the ratio of 1:1 whereas appointment on the post of Lascar is 
entirely by direct recruitment. It is also provided in the Schedule 
that while literacy in Malayalam or Tamil or Kannada is the 
common qualification required for appointment as Syrang as 
well as Lascar, an individual aspiring for the post of Syrang must 
possess current Syrang’s licence while an individual aspiring 
for appointment on the post of Lascar is similarly required to 
possess a current Lascar’s Licence.
2	
KPSC
3	
the department
4	
the Special Rules
5	
Subordinate Service
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
375
Jomon K.K. v. Shajimon P. & Ors. Etc.
c.	
The licence noted above is a certificate of competency that is 
referred to in Chapter III of the Kerala Inland Vessels Rules, 
2010. In terms thereof, any aspiring individual fulfilling the 
qualifications statutorily prescribed is issued a certificate of 
competency upon succeeding in the “viva voce examination” 
that is conducted either for a Syrang’s licence or a Lascar’s 
licence. Inter alia, while a person aspiring for a Syrang’s licence 
is required to be 10th standard pass, it is 8th standard pass for 
anyone aspiring for a Lascar’s licence. 
d.	
By a letter dated 9th October, 2012 addressed to the Director 
of the Department, the Director of Ports6 conveyed to the 
following effect:
…
This is to communicate formally that the Syrang, Master 
and Driver Certificate issued by the Chief Examiner under 
the KIV Rules· 2010 is a certificate superior to Lascar 
Certificate. Hence those who possess Syrang, Master and 
Driver Certificate will be proficient in Lascar work also. Thus 
Syrang and Master Certificate can be considered more 
than equivalent to Lascar Certificate and such persons 
are eligible for the job ‘lacer’ (sic, lascar) also.
This communication is issued based on the representation 
received from a few candidates who applied to the Public 
Service Commission for Lascar job in order to enable 
them to complete the application process. Copy of their 
representation is enclosed. However the final selection 
may be done based on practical test, on the skills required, 
type of vessel and other requirements of the organization.
… 
e.	
The appellant was the holder of a Syrang’s licence, which was 
valid when he noticed the advertisement.
f.	
Perceiving that possession of a Syrang’s licence makes him 
eligible to apply for the post of Lascar which, incidentally, 
happens to be the feeder post for promotion to the post of 
6	
the Director
376
Supreme Court Reports
Syrang, the appellant offered his candidature and acquitted 
himself creditably resulting in his name figuring at serial number 
1 (OX category) in the “Ranked List” which was circulated vide 
No. 257/17/ERVI and brought into force with effect from 22nd 
February, 2017. He had secured 45.67 marks. Based on such 
rank, the Secretary, KPSC informed the appellant vide letter 
dated 2nd May, 2017 as follows:
…
You are informed that you have been advised for 
recruitment as Boat Lascar on Rs.8,960 -14,260/- in the 
above Department against BC Turn. The selection is 
subject to Rule 3(c) and 10(b) of the Kerala State and 
Subordinate Service Rules, 1958. 
Further instructions will be issued to you in due course by 
the above Department.
…
g.	
While the appellant was awaiting an offer of appointment, on 8th 
May, 2017 and 27th July, 2017, two sets of original applications 
under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 19857 were 
filed before the Thiruvananthapuram and Ernakulam Benches 
of the Kerala Administrative Tribunal.8 
h.	
The prayer in O.A. No. 857 of 2017 was for a declaration that 
inclusion of ineligible candidates, who do not possess the 
essential qualification, is oppressive, arbitrary and illegal; a 
direction be issued to restructure the “Ranked List” by removing 
all such ineligible candidates; and to pass incidental orders. In 
OA (EKM) 1566 of 2017, similarly, the Tribunal was urged to 
declare candidates who did not have valid and current Lascar’s 
licence as on 17th October, 2012, i.e., the last date for receipt 
of applications, as not eligible to be included in the “Ranked 
List” as well as for issuance of a direction to KPSC to recast 
the “Ranked List” by excluding the candidates not possessing 
valid Lascar’s licence on 17th October, 2012.
7	
O.A. No. 857 of 2017 and O.A. (EKM) No. 1566 of 2017
8	
Tribunal
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
377
Jomon K.K. v. Shajimon P. & Ors. Etc.
i.	
Importantly, in OA No. 857 of 2017, no private party figured 
in the array of respondents and there were only three official 
respondents (Director of the department, the Director and 
KPSC). In OA (EKM) No. 1566 of 2017, apart from the official 
respondents, only 5 of the several selected candidates were 
joined as respondents. The appellant was not one among the five 
private respondents who were impleaded in the said application. 
j.	
During the pendency of the original applications before the 
Tribunal, the appellant came to be appointed on 28th July, 2017 
as “Boat Lascar”.
k.	
The reply statement filed by the Director before the Tribunal 
on 20th February, 2018 is extracted hereunder:
“2. Port Department is implementing KIV Rules 2010. 
Director of Ports is the competent Authority to oversee 
the various regulations, under the provisions of KIV 
Rules 2010. KIV Rules insist that the MASTER, 
DRIVER AND SYRANG certificates will be issued only 
after 2 years from the date of issue of Lascar certificate 
by the Chief Examiner, Department of Ports. So the 
persons who got competency certificates for Master, 
Driver and Syrang also have sufficient eligibilities to 
be the boat lascar. The above competency certificate 
holders are also eligible to apply for the post of Lascar 
and it is stated by the Director of Ports in the letter 
No.B3-389/2011 dated 9.10.2012.”
l.	
In due course, the original applications were heard by the 
Tribunal. Vide its judgment and order dated 9th March, 2018,9 
the Tribunal allowed both the original applications and directed 
KPSC to recast the “Ranked List” and to cancel the advice to 
appoint ineligible candidates.
m.	
Acting in pursuance of the Tribunal’s order, KPSC issued a 
show cause notice dated 31st July, 2018 to the appellant calling 
upon him to explain why the advice for his appointment be not 
treated as cancelled. The appellant responded thereto by his 
reply dated 10th August, 2018. Thereafter, KPSC issued an order 
9	
Tribunal’s order
378
Supreme Court Reports
dated 24th October, 2018 cancelling the advice for appointment 
of the appellant following which the Director cancelled the 
appellant’s appointment as “Boat Lascar” by his order dated 
27th October, 2018. 
n.	
On 3rd November, 2018, the appellant challenged the Tribunal’s 
order before the High Court in separate writ petitions. However, 
a Division Bench of the High Court by the common impugned 
judgment and order dismissed such writ petitions.
Contentions of the parties
3.	
Mr. P. N. Ravindran, learned senior counsel for the appellant, argued 
that both the Tribunal in allowing the original applications as well 
as the High Court in dismissing the writ petitions fell in error in 
not appreciating that a higher qualification could never have been 
regarded as a disqualification for appointment on the post of Lascar. 
4.	
Mr. Ravindran relied on the decisions in Parvaiz Ahmed Parry v. 
State of Jammu and Kashmir10 and Chandra Shekhar Singh and 
Others v. State of Jharkhand 11 in support of the contention that a 
candidate having a higher degree in the subject prescribed under 
the advertisement cannot be disqualified by reason of ineligibility for 
not possessing the required degree.
5.	
Mr. Ravindran further argued that by the time the Tribunal was moved 
by the unsuccessful candidates, the appellant had not been appointed. 
However, he did figure in the “Ranked List”. During the pendency of 
the original applications, the appellant came to be appointed. Despite 
such appointment, he was not impleaded as a respondent in either 
of the two original applications filed before the Tribunal. When the 
original applications were filed, seeking exclusion of candidates 
holding Syrang’s licence and recasting of the “Ranked List”, without 
the appellant being included as a respondent, no adverse order could 
have been passed by the Tribunal qua him. Since the appellant 
was not impleaded as a respondent in the original applications, the 
same were defective and no relief could have been granted to the 
unsuccessful candidates/original applicants.
10	
(2015) 17 SCC 709
11	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 595
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
379
Jomon K.K. v. Shajimon P. & Ors. Etc.
6.	
Mr. Ravindran also submitted that assuming this Court were not 
inclined to accept the claim of the appellant that he could have been 
considered for selection despite not possessing a current Lascar’s 
licence, it was contended that this was an eminently fit case for 
exercise of power by this Court under Article 142 of the Constitution. 
Reliance was placed on the Constitution Bench decision in Supreme 
Court Bar Association vs Union Of India and Anr.12. 
7.	
Per contra, Mr. Nair, learned counsel for KPSC, contended that the 
appellant and similarly placed candidates having Syrang’s licence 
were considered for selection in view of the letter of the Director 
dated 9th October, 2012. However, the Tribunal having held that 
candidates not possessing current Lascar’s licence could not have 
been considered for selection and having directed KPSC to recast 
the “Ranked List”, the same was duly complied with resulting in 
cancellation of the advice for appointment of the appellant. 
8.	
Mr. Nair relied on the decision in District Collector & Chairman, 
Vizianagaram Social Welfare Residential School Society  v. 
M. Tripura Sundari Devi13 for the proposition that when an 
advertisement mentions a particular qualification and an appointment 
is made in disregard of the same, it is not a matter only between 
the appointing authority and the appointee concerned: the aggrieved 
are all those who had similar or even better qualifications than 
the appointee or appointees but who had not applied for the post 
because they did not possess the qualifications mentioned in the 
advertisement.
9.	
According to him, had it been known that anyone not having a 
Lascar’s licence but having a Syrang’s licence would be eligible for 
consideration for appointment on the post of Lascar, others having 
Syrang’s certificate could also have applied thereby enlarging the zone 
of consideration. However, keeping the process confined only to a 
select few and not extending opportunity to all others similarly situate 
like the appellant would contravene Article 16 of the Constitution and 
also amount to a fraud on public. 
12	
(1998) 4 SCC 409
13	
(1990) 3 SCC 655
380
Supreme Court Reports
10.	 P.M. Latha and Anr. v. State of Kerala and ors.14 was also cited by 
Mr. Nair in support of his contention that anyone holding a Syrang’s 
licence could not have been considered on the ground of being more 
qualified than the holder of a Lascar’s licence, and that whether 
Syrang’s licence could be considered as appropriate for recruitment 
of a Lascar is a question which ought to be left to be considered by 
the authorities concerned. Since, in P.M. Latha (supra), this Court 
did not consider candidates having B. Ed degree as qualified for the 
vacancies advertised, which required recruitment to be made from 
candidates with TTC qualifications, he urged that dismissal of the 
appeal is the only logical conclusion.
11.	 Mr. Nishe Rajan Shonker, learned counsel for the State of Kerala, 
adopted the submissions of Mr. Nair.
Question of law
12.	 The central question of law arising for decision on this appeal is, 
whether the appellant who did not hold a current Lascar’s licence 
but was the holder of a Syrang’s licence could have been considered 
qualified to participate in the recruitment process as well as appointed. 
13.	 Certain notable features having a bearing on the issue to be decided 
by us are these:
a.	
The advertisement dated 15th September, 2012 did stipulate 
that only those holding a current Lascar’s licence are eligible to 
apply. At the same time, it did not specifically say that anyone 
holding a Syrang’s licence or a licence higher than a Lascar’s 
licence is not eligible to apply. 
b.	
According to the Director, a Syrang’s licence is something 
superior to a Lascar’s licence and that holders of Syrang’s 
licence can be considered more than equivalent to Lascar’s 
licence, thus, being eligible for the job of Lascar also.
c.	
A communication to the above effect was made by the Director 
to KPSC, not on his own, but based on the representation 
received from a few candidates who, presumably having 
Syrang’s licences, had applied for the post of Lascar and wanted 
to compete with aspirants having Lascar’s licence.
14	
2003 3 SCC 541
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
381
Jomon K.K. v. Shajimon P. & Ors. Etc.
d.	
Despite the appellant being selected, his name figuring in the 
“Ranked List”, he being recommended by the Secretary, KPSC 
on 2nd May, 2017 for appointment as “Boat Lascar” as well as his 
appointment on 28th July, 2017 during the pendency of the original 
applications, he was not impleaded as respondent therein. 
e.	
The original applicants could not have feigned ignorance as 
to the identity of candidates possessing Syrang’s licence who 
came to be appointed; also, the Tribunal did not take the pain 
of passing appropriate orders to have them impleaded. Thus, 
the Tribunal’s order adverse to the interest of the appellant was 
effectively passed behind his back.
f.	
Despite there being a reference in the show cause notice dated 
31st July, 2018 to the Tribunal’s order, the appellant chose to 
reply to the show cause notice instead of challenging the such 
order before the High Court either under Article 226 or 227 of 
the Constitution of India.
g.	
Once the appellant’s appointment as “Boat Lascar” was 
cancelled on 27th October, 2018 by the Director, such order 
provided him a cause of action to move an original application 
before the Tribunal under Section 19 of the 1985 Act; however, 
instead of moving the Tribunal, the appellant moved the High 
Court in its writ jurisdiction, admittedly, when the Tribunal’s 
order had been acted upon.
Analysis and Reasons
14.	 In our considered opinion, the High Court would have been justified 
in dismissing the writ petitions of the appellant at the threshold 
on the ground that the order of cancellation had intervened in the 
meanwhile providing a cause of action for him to move the Tribunal. 
In such original application, he could have even prayed for recall of 
the Tribunal’s order on the ground of the same having been passed 
behind his back and upon such recall, to hear him on the merits of 
the original applications. Such a course of action was available to the 
appellant in terms of the decisions of this Court in K. Ajit Babu v. 
Union of India15 and Rama Rao v. M. G. Maheshwara Rao.16 
15	
(1997) 6 SCC 473
16	
(2007) 14 SCC 54
382
Supreme Court Reports
However, the High Court examined the appellant’s claim on merits 
leading to dismissal of his writ petitions and we too having been 
addressed on the merits of the appeals, it would be just and fair to 
answer the question that we have formulated above without taking 
too technical a view.
15.	 First, we propose to consider the argument touching non-joinder 
of the appellant in the proceedings before the Tribunal though, 
undoubtedly, he was a necessary party.
16.	 The effect of non-joinder of a necessary party in proceedings where 
an order is passed adverse to the interest of the non-party was 
considered by a co-ordinate bench of this Court in Ranjan Kumar v. 
State of Bihar.17 
17.	 The decision in Ranjan Kumar (supra) was followed by the decision 
in Kulwant Singh v. Dayaram,18 where promotion to the post of 
head constables in Chandigarh Police was the subject matter of 
consideration. This Court held that after appearing in a competitive 
examination and upon being selected, the appointees become an 
identified category and that if the rights of such appointees forming part 
of such identified category are to be affected by any determination, the 
situation commands that they should be impleaded in the proceedings 
as necessary parties. The non-joinder now permits them to take the 
plea that the impugned order does not bind them. 
18.	 The decisions in Ranjan Kumar (supra) and Kulwant Singh (supra) 
are authorities for the proposition that selectees who are appointed 
or promoted must be arrayed as parties in the original proceedings 
where their selections are challenged. Kulwant Singh (supra) has 
taken a step further and ruled that mere awareness of pendency 
of litigation does not make the order passed by the Court/Tribunal 
interfering with the selection binding upon such appointees or 
promotees. 
19.	 Though there can be little quarrel with the law laid down in Ranjan 
Kumar (supra) and Kulwant Singh (supra) and considering what 
has been argued by Mr. Ravindran as a proposition of law, noted 
above, to be correct, what stands out is that the appellant did 
17	
(2014) 16 SCC 187
18	
(2015) 3 SCC 177
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
383
Jomon K.K. v. Shajimon P. & Ors. Etc.
not immediately challenge the Tribunal’s order and rested on his 
oars to throw a challenge till his service came to be terminated. 
In fact, he took a chance of favourable consideration of his case 
by responding to the show cause. Having taken a chance and not 
being successful, he cannot, thereafter, succeed before us on the 
ground of his non-joinder as a necessary party. Having not initiated 
appropriate legal action that the law permitted him to take, he can 
get back his service only if the primary contention raised by Mr. 
Ravindran succeeds.
20.	 Next, turning to the crux of the issue, it is absolutely necessary to 
bear in mind that though the posts of Syrang and Lascar are included 
in Class III of the Subordinate Service, the requisite qualifications 
for appointment on such posts as ordained by the Special Rules 
are different. Moreover, it is specifically ordained by Rule 6 of the 
Special Rules as follows:
“6. Other Qualifications. - No person shall be eligible for 
appointment to the categories specified in column (1) of 
the Table below by the method specified in column (2) 
unless he possesses the qualifications prescribed in the 
corresponding entry in column (3) thereof.”
21.	 As noted in the factual narrative, possession of a current Lascar’s 
licence is an essential qualification for anyone aspiring for the post of 
Lascar. This is what is laid down in column (3), i.e., the qualifications 
required; and going by what is said therein read with Rule 6, there 
can be no gainsaying that apart from those having a current Lascar’s 
licence, none else is eligible. The word “current” is also significant 
in the sense that the Rules insist on a subsisting licence, i.e., a 
certificate of competency, which is valid and operative during the 
time the last date for receiving applications intervenes. 
22.	 The advertisement did not require anything else other than what the 
Special Rules require. The absence of express mention that those 
holding a Syrang’s licence or a Driver’s licence which, according to the 
Director, are superior to a Lascar’s licence, is insignificant, irrelevant 
and immaterial having regard to the clear terms of Rule 6 (supra).
23.	 Viewed from a different angle, on a conjoint reading of Rule 6 of 
the Special Rules and the advertisement, we find both mentioning 
a particular qualification, i.e., a current Lascar’s licence, which each 
aspirant has to possess for being considered eligible to participate 
384
Supreme Court Reports
in the process of selection, thereby creating a distinct class and it 
is aspirants falling in such class alone who could have applied for 
being considered. Thus, any aspirant, even though possessing a 
Syrang’s licence or a Driver’s licence not being part of such distinct 
class, could not have been considered eligible. The classification 
has not been shown to be and is not unreasonable.
24.	 True it is, from the reply statement of the Director filed before the 
Tribunal and also from the 2010 Rules, it does appear that the 
holder of a Syrang’s licence is mandatorily required to obtain and 
have a Lascar’s licence for 2 years and, therefore, without having 
a Lascar’s licence one cannot apply for a Syrang’s licence. By the 
same analogy, it could be presumed that the holder of a Syrang’s 
licence is having the requisite eligibility to be a Lascar. However, 
what turns the tide against the appellant is the requirement of the 
‘current’ Lascar’s licence, discussed above, which the appellant did 
not have on the last date for receiving applications.
25.	 We have further seen from the letter of the Director dated 9th October, 
2010 addressed to KPSC that it was not voluntary; rather, it was 
at the behest of candidates who did not possess current Lascar’s 
licence. It can well be presumed that the Director buckled under 
pressure. However, notwithstanding that, qualifications statutorily laid 
down could not have been diluted by what the Director felt should 
be considered by KPSC and, therefore, it is the statutorily prescribed 
qualifications that should prevail. 
26.	 Mr. Nair is also right in referring to us the decision in M. Tripura 
Sundari Devi (supra). Although in such decision it was held that it 
amounts to a fraud on public to appoint candidates with qualifications 
inferior to the qualifications advertised, which is not precisely the case 
here because the appellant has higher qualifications than what was 
required, yet, the other principle of law flowing from such decision 
is squarely applicable. It has neither been shown that the Director’s 
letter dated 9th October, 2012 was given wide publicity nor has it 
been shown by the appellant that KPSC had issued any corrigendum 
vide public notice whereby the zone of consideration was enlarged 
permitting holders of a Syrang’s licence to participate in the process. 
We, thus, hold drawing inspiration from the said decision that the 
aggrieved are all those who had similar or even better qualifications 
than the appellant but who had not applied for the post because they 
were unaware of the fact that persons not having a current Lascar’s 
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
385
Jomon K.K. v. Shajimon P. & Ors. Etc.
licence would also be eligible to apply and compete in the process. 
Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment being a sine 
qua non for a fair and transparent selection process, such equality 
is conspicuously absent in the present case. 
27.	 There is one other important aspect which also cannot be lightly 
overlooked. We shall assume for a moment that though the process 
was commenced for appointment on vacant posts of Lascar, there 
was no illegality in persons having Syrang’s licence being permitted 
to participate. Of course, there could be aspirants holding Lascar’s 
licence in sufficient numbers who might not have the higher 
qualifications necessary for even appearing for a viva voce to aim at 
possessing a certificate of competency as Syrang. Those aspirants, 
holding a Lascar’s licence, might not also be so capable and/or 
competent for obtaining a Syrang’s licence. After all, all individuals are 
not blessed with the same level of intelligence, human abilities and 
intellect. The distribution of innate abilities and intellectual prowess 
being far from uniform, resulting in a diverse spectrum of human 
potential, it is axiomatic that aspirants having only a Lascar’s licence 
can never be considered for direct recruitment on any post in Class III 
of the Subordinate Service other than a Lascar. It is quite but natural 
that in the matter of observation, perception and memorisation of 
details of principles of navigation, and skill in respect of seamanship, 
there would be significant differences in the faculties of different 
individuals. If persons holding Syrang’s licence - who are obviously 
better equipped than persons holding Lascar’s licence - are allowed 
to apply and participate in the process for appointment on the post of 
Lascar, the probability of the persons holding Lascar’s licence being 
outperformed by the persons holding Syrang’s licence would be quite 
high. It could also be a distinct possibility where all the vacant posts 
of Lascar are filled up by persons having Syrang’s licence but not 
having a current Lascar’s licence as per the statutory requirement. 
That would pose a real difficulty for persons not so fortunate and 
lacking in higher intelligence, abilities and intellect, for, they would 
cease to have a level playing field of competing with other similarly 
qualified candidates, and left to compete with candidates having 
higher qualifications despite the zone of consideration having been 
specially carved out for holders of current Lascar’s licence. It is 
not that the holders of Syrang’s licence are left in the lurch. Those 
having Syrang’s licence could well compete for appointment on the 
386
Supreme Court Reports
post of Syrang in the 50% direct recruitment quota along with others 
having current Syrang’s licence. If, in case, all the vacant posts of 
Lascar are filled up by persons having Syrang’s licence and such 
holders of Syrang’s licence do not participate in the process for direct 
recruitment to the post of Syrang, it is fairly likely that the persons 
holding Lascar’s licence would never secure any public employment. 
That could not have been the intention of a welfare State.
28.	 Also, it cannot be gainsaid that not only the qualifications but the 
nature of duties required to be performed and the nature of service to 
be rendered by a Lascar and a Syrang are different. Merely because 
the post of Lascar is a feeder post for promotion to the post of Syrang 
does not per se make the holder of a Syrang’s licence qualified for 
the job of a Lascar. Thus, nothing much turns on it.
29.	 Law is well-settled that an appointment made contrary to the statute/
statutory rule would be void [see: Pramod Kumar v. U.P. Secondary 
Education Services Commission19].
30.	 Based on such consideration, we are ad idem with the Division Bench 
of the High Court that KPSC could not have included candidates 
with licences other than a Lascar’s licence in the “Ranked List” and 
proceed to recommend those candidates for appointment.
31.	 On merits, therefore, no legally protected right of the appellant having 
been affected by the impugned action, he has no valid claim. 
32.	 We have considered the decisions of this Court in Parvaiz Ahmed 
Parry (supra) and Chandra Shekhar Singh (supra).
33.	 In Parvaiz Ahmed Parry (supra) the appellant therein possessed 
degrees in BSc with Forestry as one of his major subjects as well 
as MSc (Forestry). The qualification prescribed in the Advertisement 
was “BSc (Forestry) or equivalent from any university recognised 
by ICAR”. This Court held that the appellant’s qualifications were 
equivalent to the minimum prescribed qualifications and should be 
considered for the concerned post. 
34.	 Chandra Shekhar Singh (supra) was on the question of whether 
‘degree’ as mentioned in the advertisement therein included a post-
graduate degree, which the appellants therein possessed. This Court 
19	
(2008) 7 SCC 153
[2025] 5 S.C.R. 
387
Jomon K.K. v. Shajimon P. & Ors. Etc.
applying the golden rule of interpretation held that the word ‘degree’ 
would include within its scope and ambit all three degrees – bachelor’s 
degree, master’s degree and a doctorate degree – unless a specific 
expulsion has been made. 
35.	 The said decisions are, thus, distinguishable on facts.
36.	 We hasten to add that whether or not the action of the employer to 
exclude an aspirant from the process of selection (on the ground that 
either he is over qualified for a particular post or has qualifications 
which, being over and above what is ordained by statutory rules 
or rules framed under the proviso to Rule 309 of the Constitution, 
does not match the qualification specifically required) is justified 
has to be decided considering the rules governing the selection, 
the qualifications prescribed, the nature of duty to be performed, the 
nature of service to be rendered and a host of other factors. It has to 
be remembered that, at times, the employer’s need to have the right 
people at the right place, and not always the higher qualified, has to 
be conceded. We know of decisions holding that over-qualification 
cannot be a disqualification since such an approach amounts to 
discouraging the acquisition of qualifications on the one hand and on 
the other, such an approach could be seen as arbitrary, discriminatory 
and not in national interest. However, this principle cannot be put 
in a straitjacket imposing rigid or inflexible rules or norms. Lack of 
public employment opportunities in sufficient numbers may force 
even a Master degree holder to apply for the job of a peon but, if he 
is appointed upon his application being favourably considered, what 
happens to the aspirants who have not had the means of pursuing 
study beyond the 12th standard? Do they remain unemployed for ever, 
if all or majority of the posts of peon are filled up by such degree 
holders? What happens if the Master degree holder, in pursuit of 
greener pastures, leaves the post of Peon for a better and secured 
higher job commensurate with his qualifications after a couple of 
years? Does it not, in such a case, burden the public exchequer by 
requiring the employer to initiate a fresh selection process? Is not 
the State, as a model employer, obliged to ensure that the posts of 
peon are filled up only by those having the basic qualification, and 
not by over qualified candidates, for sub-serving the common good? 
Does not the State have the obligation to strive to ensure that all 
citizens have adequate means of livelihood? These are questions 
which no Court can afford to ignore. We end by saying that each 
388
Supreme Court Reports
case that comes before the Court has to be decided on its own 
peculiar facts and the problem that it presents for resolution and that 
there can be no universally accepted rule that every time, a higher 
qualified candidate is to be preferred to a candidate who matches 
the essential qualification required for the post. 
37.	 It is now time to consider Mr. Ravindran’s final submission that this 
is an eminent case for exercising powers under Article 142 of the 
Constitution. 
38.	 This Court in Ashok Kumar Sonkar v. Union of India20 held that if 
an appointment is illegal, it is non-est in the eye of law and rendering 
the appointment a nullity and principles of equity in a case of such 
nature would have no role to play; also that, sympathy should not 
be misplaced. 
39.	 Exercise of power under Article 142 of the Constitution would 
have been warranted in the present case if palpable injustice were 
demonstrated. Unfortunately for the appellant, despite the assiduous 
endeavour of Mr. Ravindran, we have consciously decided to confine 
our role to being the dispute-settlors. 
40.	 We are of the considered opinion that the appellant having gained 
entry through a process which was not legal and valid, this is not a 
fit and proper case where this Court ought, in exercise of its power 
under Article 142 of the Constitution, to ignore the illegality and 
invalidity to come to his rescue. 
Conclusion
41.	 The appeals, accordingly, fail and are dismissed. No costs.
42.	 Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
20	
(2007) 4 SCC 54