[2025] 6 S.C.R. 22 : 2025 INSC 617
K.R. Suresh 
v. 
R. Poornima & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 5822 of 2025)
02 May 2025
[J.B. Pardiwala* and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the correctness of the order passed by 
the courts below dismissing the suit instituted by the appellant-
purchaser for specific performance of contract; and whether the 
appellant entitled to the refund of the amount purportedly paid as 
advance money.
Headnotes†
Specific Relief Act, 1963 – s.22 – Specific performance 
of contract – Refund of advance money – Agreement for  
sale-ATS between the parties pertaining to suit property for 
a sale consideration – Appellant-purchaser issued cheques 
towards the advance amount – Agreement stipulated 
that balance amount to be paid within four months, and 
in the event of failure, the advance amount would be 
forfeited, and upon failure on part of respondents-owners, 
double the advance amount to be paid to appellant as  
compensation  – Appellant did not pay the balance within 
the agreed time period – Respondent-owners forfeited 
the advance amount and cancelled the agreement, and 
also sold the property to subsequent purchasers – Suit 
for specific performance of the agreement of sale by 
appellants  – Dismissed by trial court as also by the High 
Court – Correctness:
Held: No perversity or illegality in the impugned judgment – Amount 
termed as “advance money” in the agreement for sale-ATS, was 
essentially “earnest money” – It was in the nature of a guarantee 
for the due performance of the contract – It was liable to be 
forfeited in the event that the transaction fell through by reason 
of the default on part of the purchaser – Inclusion of the forfeiture 
clause in the ATS was intended to bind the contracting parties and 
ensure the due performance of the contract – This is particularly 
* Author
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
23
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
significant given the stipulated four-month period for completing 
the sale transaction and the primary object of executing the ATS, 
being the urgency of the respondent-owners which was known 
to the appellant – Findings of the courts below affirming that 
time was of the essence, further substantiates the said intent – 
Stipulated amount under the ATS was in the nature of an earnest 
money deposit and thus, s.74 of the 1872 Act cannot apply to 
the same – Forfeiture clause was fair and equitable rather than 
one-sided and unconscionable, as it imposed liabilities on both 
the parties – Forfeiture of advance money by the respondent was 
lawful and justified as there was breach of contract by the appellant, 
which led to financial losses to the respondents – Furthermore, as 
regards the refund of earnest money, u/s.22(1)(b) it is not a relief 
that automatically flows from a decree for specific performance 
of a sale agreement and must, thus, be explicitly sought – No 
such application for an amendment of the plaint moved before the 
courts below, appellant never prayed for the refund of the advance 
money – Law aids the vigilant, not those who sleep over their 
rights – Contract Act, 1872 – s.74. [Paras 31, 37, 40-42, 61-65]
Specific Relief Act, 1963 – s.22 – Alternative relief of refund 
of earnest money u/s.22 – When: 
Held: Plaint may be amended at any stage of the proceedings to 
enable the plaintiff to seek an alternative relief, including that of 
refund of earnest money, and the courts have been vested with 
wide judicial discretion to permit such amendments – However, 
u/s.22 courts cannot grant such relief suo moto, since the inclusion 
of the prayer clause remains sine qua non for the grant of such 
relief – When an “appropriate case” exists for seeking the said 
relief under this provision, it must be specifically sought either in 
the original plaint or by way of an amendment. [Para 58] 
Contract – Agreement of sale – Forfeiture of advance money – 
Difference between “advance money” and “earnest money”:
Held: Terms “advance money” and “earnest money” are often 
used interchangeably – Word “advance” means money in whole 
or in part, forming the consideration of an agreement paid before 
the same is completely payable – Word “earnest” stands for a 
sum of money given for the purpose of binding a contract, which 
is forfeited if the contract does not go off and adjusted in price if 
the contract goes through. [Paras 30-31]
24
Supreme Court Reports
Case Law Cited
Desh Raj v. Rohtash Singh [2022] 18 SCR 65 : (2023) 3 SCC 
714; Kamal Kumar v. Premlata Joshi [2019] 1 SCR 54 : (2019) 
3 SCC 704; Pydi Ramana v. Davarasety Manmadha Rao (2024) 
7 SCC 515; Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills v. Tata Air Craft Ltd. 
[1970] 3 SCR 127 : (1969) 3 SCC 522; Videocon Properties 
Ltd. v. Bhalchandra Laboratories [2003] Supp. 6 SCR 1197 : 
(2004) 3 SCC 711; Satish Batra v. Sudhir Rawal [2012] 9 SCR 
662 : (2013) 1 SCC 345; Central Bank of India v. Shanmugavelu 
(2024) 6 SCC 641; Chand Rani v. Kamal Rani [1992] Supp. 
3 SCR 798 : (1993) 1 SCC 519; Welspun Specialty Solutions 
Ltd. v. ONGC [2021] 11 SCR 120 : (2022) 2 SCC 382; Fateh 
Chand v. Balkishan Dass [1964] 1 SCR 515 : 1963 SCC OnLine 
SC 49; Maula Bux v. Union of India [1970] 1 SCR 928 : (1969) 
2 SCC 554; Kailash Nath Associates v. DDA [2015] 1 SCR 627 : 
(2015) 4 SCC 136; Lakshmanan v. B.R. Mangalagiri [1994] 
Supp. 6 SCR 561 : (1995) Supp. 2 SCC 33; Godrej Projects 
Development Ltd. v. Anil Karlekar [2025] 2 SCR 343 : 2025 
SCC OnLine SC 222; Sahida Bibi v. Sk. Golam Muhammad, 
1982 SCC OnLine Cal 59; Tarit Bhowmik v Mukul Day, 2014 
SCC Cal 5361; Manickam v. Vasantha, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 
2096 – referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
P Ramanatha Aiyar, “Advanced Law Lexicon”, 7th Edn; Sir Frederick 
Pollock, 3rd Baronet, Pollock & Mulla: The Indian Contract and 
Specific Relief Acts, 16th Edn – referred to.
List of Acts
Specific Relief Act, 1963; Contract Act, 1872; Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908.
List of Keywords
Agreement of sale; Advance amount; Earnest amount; Probate 
certificate; Guarantee for due performance of contract; Forfeiture 
clause; Time was of essence; Compensation for breach of contract; 
Refund of earnest money; Alternative relief; Amendment to pleadings; 
Amendment at any stage of the proceeding; Specific performance of 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
25
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
contract; Refund of the amount paid as advance money; Forfeiture 
of advance money; Amendment of the plaint; Alternative relief of 
refund of earnest money; Appropriate case.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 5822 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 05.08.2021 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bengaluru in RFA No. 386 of 2013
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant:
Anand Sanjay M Nuli, Sr. Adv., M/s. Nuli & Nuli, Suraj Kaushik, 
Firoz Gandhi, Nahar Singh Yadav.
Advs. for the Respondents:
Ms. Supreeta Sharanagouda, Sharanagouda Patil, Mrs. Supreeta 
Sharanagouda , Jyotish Pandey, Vinod Kumar Srivastava, Saket 
Gogia, Ms. Gauri Pande, Ms. Sheetal Maggon, Mansingh, Dhawesh 
Pahuja.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.B. Pardiwala, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the 
following parts: -
INDEX*
A. FACTUAL MATRIX .............................................................
2
i.	
Judgment of the Trial Court .......................................
8
B. IMPUGNED JUDGMENT ....................................................
11
C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT ............... 15
D. SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT 
NOS. 1-4 ................................................................................ 16
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.
26
Supreme Court Reports
E.
SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT 
NOS. 5-7 ................................................................................ 17
F.
ANALYSIS ............................................................................. 18
i.	
Validity of the Forfeiture of Advance Money .................. 19
a.	 Difference between Earnest Money and Advance 
Money ....................................................................... 19
b.	 Permissible Extent of Forfeiture ........................... 27
ii.	 Law on the Alternative Relief of Refund of Earnest 
Money under Section 22 of the 1963 Act ................... 35
G. CONCLUSION ...................................................................... 42
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High 
Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru dated 05.08.2021 in R.F.A. No. 
386/2013 (SP) (“impugned judgment”) by which the High Court 
dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellant (original plaintiff) 
and thereby affirmed the judgment and order dated 24.11.2012 
passed by the Court of V Additional City Civil and Sessions Judge 
at Bengaluru City, dismissing O.S. No. 3559/2008 instituted by the 
appellant herein for the specific performance of contract.
A.	
FACTUAL MATRIX
3.	
The position of the parties before this Court, the High Court and 
before the Trial Court is tabulated as follows: -
BEFORE THIS 
COURT
BEFORE THE 
HIGH COURT
BEFORE THE 
TRIAL COURT
REMARKS
Appellant
Appellant
Plaintiff
Original 
Purchaser/
Agreement of 
Sale Holder
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
27
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
Respondent 
No. 1
Respondent 
No. 1
Defendant No. 1
Original Owner 
(by way of an 
unregistered 
Will)
Respondent 
No. 4
Respondent 
No. 4
Defendant No. 4
Husband of 
respondent 
no. 1 and GPA 
Holder
Respondent 
Nos. 2-3
Respondent 
Nos. 2-3
Defendant Nos. 
2-3
Minor children 
of respondent 
no. 1 and 
respondent 
no. 4
Respondent 
No. 5
Respondent 
No. 5 
Defendant No. 5 
Subsequent 
Purchaser (wife 
of defendant 
no. 6)
Srinivas S.
-
Defendant No. 6
Subsequent 
Purchaser 
(Deceased 
through his 
LRs)
Respondent 
Nos. 6 and 7
Respondent 
Nos. 6(a) and 
6(b)
-
Legal heirs of 
defendant no. 6
For the sake of convenience, the parties shall be referred to in terms 
of their status before the Trial Court.
4.	
The dispute arises from a claim for specific performance of 
the agreement of sale (hereinafter referred to as “ATS”) dated 
25.07.2007 in respect of the property bearing Site No.307, situated 
at Kengeri Satellite Town Layout, Kengeri Hobli, Bangalore South 
Taluk (hereinafter referred to as “suit property”). The defendant 
no. 1 acquired absolute title over the suit property by way of an 
unregistered Will dated 12.11.2002 executed by her late mother.
5.	
The defendant nos. 1-4 executed an ATS dated 25.07.2007 in favor 
of the plaintiff for the purchase of the Suit Property for total sale 
consideration of Rs.55,50,000/-. The plaintiff issued two cheques 
28
Supreme Court Reports
dated 16.07.2007 of the amount of Rs.10,00,000/- each towards 
part payment of the sale consideration, the receipt of which was duly 
acknowledged by the defendant no. 1. The said ATS stipulated that 
the sale transaction shall be completed by payment of the balance 
sale consideration of Rs. 35,50,000/- within four months from the 
date of the ATS, pursuant to which the sale deed was to be executed. 
The contents of the said ATS are extracted hereinbelow: -
“ADVANCE SALE AGREEMENT
This Advance Sale Agreement is executed on this Twenty 
fifth day of July, Two Thousand Seven (25-07-2007) -BY-
 Smt. R. Poornima, daughter of Late Rathnamma also 
wife of Sri M.L. Harsha, aged about 32 years, and Sri 
Lakshmisha, husband of Smt. R. Poornima, aged about 
39 years, and the children of Smt. Poornima and Sri M.L. 
Harsha, 1) Kum. H.R. Anusha, aged about 7 years, 2) 
Chi. H. Amogham aged about 3 years, both are minors 
represented by their mother and natural guardian Smt. R. 
Poornima, all are residing at House No.588, Postal Colony, 
Visveshwaranagara Layout, Mysore City-
IN FAVOUR OF: 
Sri K.R. Suresh, aged about 42 years, son of Sri Rudrappa, 
residing at K. Gollahalli Village, K. Gollahalli Post, Kengeri 
Hobli, Bangalore South Taluk. 
Whereas, the property mentioned in the schedule 
hereunder i.e Site bearing No.307, situated at Kengeri 
Ssatellite Town Layout, Kengeri Hobli, Bangalore South 
Taluk, the said property originally belonged to Smt. 
Rathnamma, the mother of Smt. R. Poornima, which is 
her self-acquired property. The said site was allotted to her 
on dated ___ by the Bangalore City Improvement Trust 
Board, represented by its Chairman, vide allotment letter 
No. __ KST/ __ which was allotted, Thereafter Lease-Cum-
Sale Deed registered in the office of the Sub-Registrar, 
Bangalore South Taluk, registered in Book-1 volume 2414 
pages 16 to 19 as Document No.5734/85-86, thereafter 
the possession certificate No.33.73-74 dated 16-11-1973 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
29
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
was issued, during her life time she was in possession 
and enjoyment of the said property as its absolute owner 
and the absolute sale deed executed in her favour on 
05-03-1986, in the office of the Sub-Registrar, Bangalore 
South Taluk, vide Book-1 volume 2414 pages 95-96 as 
Document No.5734/85-86, during her life time she was 
enjoying the same peacefully as its absolute owner and on 
12-12-2022 she has executed a WILL/TESTAMENT to her 
only daughter Smt. R. Poormima and on 26-12-2002 she 
passed away. After her death, her only daughter Smt. R. 
Poormima and we became the sole and absolute owners, 
successors, title holders in possession and enjoying the 
said property. Khatha also got changed to the name of 
Smt. R. Poormima in the Town Municipal Office, Kengeri 
and enjoying the same happily.
In such a way we are in possession and enjoyment of the 
schedule property and we are in need of funds to meet 
our urgent necessities, hence we have sold the schedule 
property to you for total sum of Rs.55,50,000/ (Rupees 
Fifty-five lakhs Fifty Thousand only), out of the sale 
consideration Rs.20,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty Thousand 
only) I have received advance as hereunder:-
1. Rs. 10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only) through 
cheque bearing No.110581 dated 16-07-2007 drawn 
on Canara Bank, Yediyur Branch, Bangalore-560082. 
2. Rs. 10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only) through 
cheque bearing No.110582 dated 16-07-2007 drawn 
on Canara Bank, Yediyur Branch, Bangalore-560082. 
The remaining amount of Rs.35,50,000/- (Rupees Thirty-
Five Lakhs Fifty Thousand only) we have agreed to receive 
the same at the time of registration. Within 4(four) months 
by paying the balance amount to us you can get registered 
sale deed either to your name or to the name of person 
as suggested by you.
The aforesaid property except you we have not encumbered 
the same in any manner to whomsoever, also in respect of 
said property except ourselves there are no any other title 
30
Supreme Court Reports
holders or successors, if any such dispute arisen in future 
the same will be solved by us out of our own expenses 
and for which we have agreed. 
In the event failure on your part to pay the remaining 
amount within stipulated period, the advance amount paid 
by you will be forfeited. In the event failure on our part 
to execute the sale deed, even though you are ready to 
pay the balance sale consideration and get registration 
of sale deed, in such an event we agreed to pay the 
double amount of the advance which you have paid as 
compensation. Hence, we have executed this Advance 
Sale Agreement by affixing our signature.
SCHEDULE:-
All that part and parcel of the site bearing No.307, 5th 
Main Road, Kengeri Satellite Town Layout, Kengeri Hobli, 
Bangalore South Taluk, now comes under Kengeri Town 
Municipal limits, old Khatha No.129, present khatha 
No.130, present property No.307, which comes within the 
limits of Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Paluk, bounded 
on the; 
East by: Road
West by: Site No.317 & 318
North by: Site No.308
South by: Site No.306
As bounded above measuring East-West 60-0 (sixty) feet, 
North South 40-0 (Forty) feet, together with house standing 
thereon is covered under this Advance Sale Agreement.
WITNESSES:-
1.
2.
3.
VENDOR

PURCHASER”
6.	
It is the case of the plaintiff that upon approaching the bank on 
20.09.2007 for a loan to purchase the suit property, he was instructed 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
31
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
by the bank advocate to secure the original title documents and 
a probate certificate from the defendant no. 1, as the defendant 
no. 1 had acquired title over the suit property by virtue of an 
unregistered Will. Accordingly, the plaintiff requested the defendant 
nos. 1 and 4 respectively to obtain the probate certificate from the 
competent court to establish absolute and marketable title over the 
suit property. However, despite allegedly promising to furnish the 
required documents, the defendant no. 1 failed to do so. Further, 
the plaintiff purports to have repeatedly approached the defendant 
nos. 1 and 4 respectively between 20.09.2007 and 18.02.2008, 
orally expressing his readiness and willingness to complete the sale 
transaction, yet the defendants did not come forward to perform 
their part of the contract. 
7.	
It is the case of the plaintiff that having no other alternative left, 
he ultimately issued a legal notice dated 18.02.2008 through his 
advocate, expressing his readiness and willingness and calling 
upon defendant nos. 1-4 to execute the sale deed by receiving the 
balance sale consideration. Thereafter, the plaintiff claims to have 
discovered that the defendant no. 1 was attempting to alienate the 
suit property in favour of the defendant nos. 5 and 6 respectively 
while the ATS dated 25.07.2007 was subsisting. 
8.	
The defendant no. 1 issued a reply dated 15.03.2008 denying the 
allegations levelled in the legal notice dated 18.02.2008, stating that 
the advance amount of Rs.20,00,000/- paid by the plaintiff stood 
forfeited and consequently, the ATS stood cancelled on account of 
the default by the plaintiff in making the payment for the balance 
sale consideration within the specified four-months. 
9.	
Aggrieved by the foregoing, the plaintiff instituted original suit being 
O.S. No. 3559 of 2008 before the Trial Court, praying for the following: 
(i) an order directing defendant no. 1 to execute the sale deed in 
favour of the plaintiff; (ii) deliver the possession of the suit property 
in favour of the plaintiff and; (iii) a declaration to the effect that the 
subsequent sale deed dated 15.02.2008 in favour of the defendant 
nos. 5 and 6 respectively is not binding on the plaintiff. 
10.	 It is the case of the defendant nos. 1-4 that they were in urgent 
need of the sale consideration money to avail of the One-Time 
Settlement (for short, “OTS”) benefit from the Indian Overseas Bank 
32
Supreme Court Reports
K.R. Mohalla, Mysore Branch which was time-bound for 3 months, 
thereby making time the essence of the contract. The defendant 
nos. 1-4 denied having ever agreed to produce the probate or the 
original title deeds as contended by the plaintiff. Furthermore, they 
have contended that owing to the plaintiff’s non-performance of the 
contract, they suffered substantial losses. 
11.	 Pursuant to this, the defendant nos. 1-4 terminated the ATS and 
forfeited the advance paid by the plaintiff, going by the express 
covenant of the ATS. According to the defendants, at no point of 
time during the validity of the ATS did the plaintiff convey or express 
his readiness and willingness to complete the transaction. The 
defendants have also asserted that the plaintiff instituted the suit 
long after termination of the ATS. 
12.	 The defendant nos. 5 and 6 respectively in their written statement took 
the stance that they are bona fide purchasers of the suit property for a 
valuable consideration of Rs.38,40,000/- through registered sale deed 
dated 15.02.2008. They averred that they had no knowledge of the 
prior ATS between the plaintiff and the defendant nos. 1-4. Further, 
they argued that the suit filed by the plaintiff was not maintainable 
against them as the sale deed in their favor was not challenged by 
the plaintiff.
i.	
JUDGMENT OF THE TRIAL COURT
13.	 Upon appreciation of the oral as well as documentary evidence on 
record, the Trial Court vide its judgment and order dated 24.11.2012 
dismissed the O.S. No. 3559/2008 filed by the plaintiff on the ground 
that the plaintiff had not approached the Court with clean hands. The 
Trial Court framed the following issues for its consideration:
“1. Whether the plaintiff proves the due execution of 
agreement of sale dated 25.7.2007 for sale of suit property 
for total consideration amount of Rs.55,50,000/- and paid 
the earnest money of Rs.20,00,000/-? 
2. Whether the plaintiff is always ready and willing to 
perform his part of the contract? 
3. Whether the first defendant proves the termination of 
agreement of sale dated 25.7.2007?
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
33
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
4. Whether defendant No. 5 and 6 prove that they are 
bonafide purchasers of the suit property for valuable 
consideration? 
5. Whether plaintiff is entitled for relief claimed in the suit? 
6. What order or decree?”
14.	 The findings recorded by the Trial Court in its judgment and order 
can be better understood in five parts: 
(i)	
First, on the issue of time being the essence of the contract, 
the Trial Court recorded that the defendant nos. 1-4 were acting 
under a necessity wherein they required the sale consideration 
money urgently to discharge the loan availed for the purpose 
of their business expansion which was in the nature of an OTS 
facility, a fact which the plaintiff was cognizant of as per his 
testimony. The Trial Court held that the defendants proved that 
time was the essence of the contract and hence, it was the 
bounden duty of the plaintiff to complete the transaction within 
the specified period.
(ii)	
Secondly, the Trial Court, while examining the issue of the 
unregistered Will and probate, noted that the defendant no. 1, 
as the sole legal heir of her mother, became the absolute owner 
of the suit property upon her mother’s demise. The Court also 
underscored the settled law that a Will need not be registered 
and lack of such registration does not impute its authenticity, thus 
making the procurement of probate unnecessary. Additionally, 
there was nothing on record to indicate that the advocate for 
the bank insisted for a probate certificate. The plaintiff claimed 
to have forgotten the name of the said advocate and had no 
opinion in writing to rely upon. Further, neither the legal advisor 
nor DW2 (defendant no. 4) was examined on the issue of 
probate, leading to an adverse inference against the plaintiff. 
The Court held that in the absence of any recitals in the ATS 
requiring the defendants to furnish original title deeds to the 
bank within four months, the plea taken by the plaintiff was 
false, frivolous, and concocted. 
(iii)	 Thirdly, on the issue of readiness and willingness to perform, 
the Trial Court recorded that the plaintiff did not produce any 
34
Supreme Court Reports
bank passbook, account extracts, ITR or other documents, to 
establish that he had sufficient finances to pay the balance 
sale consideration within the stipulated four-month period. The 
plaintiff, in his oral evidence, admitted that he had no funds 
in his bank account and lacked documentary evidence to 
substantiate possession of the required amount. Further, in his 
oral evidence, the plaintiff categorically conceded that his legal 
notice dated 18.02.2008 was issued only after the four-month 
period had lapsed. In view of these facts, the Court concluded 
that the plaintiff failed to prove his readiness and willingness 
to perform the ATS.
(iv)	 Fourthly, the Trial Court held that the defendant nos. 1-4 were 
not required to notify the plaintiff about the lapse of the four-
month period or the subsequent sale of the suit property to 
the defendant nos. 5 and 6 respectively, as no such obligation 
was stipulated in the ATS. It further ruled that the defendant 
no. 1 had the absolute legal right to alienate the suit property. 
The Court, relying on the testimony of DW1 (defendant no. 
6), found the defendant nos. 5 and 6 respectively to be bona 
fide purchasers of the suit property, who were unaware of the 
prior ATS and its cancellation. Consequently, the allegation of 
collusion between the defendant nos. 1 and 4 & the defendant 
nos. 5 and 6, as regards the subsequent sale of the suit property, 
was found baseless. 
(v)	
Lastly, on the issue of forfeiture of advance money, the Trial 
Court held that the advance money, being primarily a security 
for the due performance of the ATS, was rightfully forfeited by 
the defendant nos. 1-4 in view of the plaintiff’s failure to perform 
and the resultant huge loss sustained by the defendant nos. 
1-4. The Court also took note of the fact that the ATS contained 
explicit recitals regarding forfeiture. In light of the aforesaid, it 
was held that the plaintiff was not entitled to a refund of the 
advance money.
B.	
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT
15.	 Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the Trial Court, the appellant/
plaintiff, preferred First Appeal before the High Court in R.F.A. No. 
386/2013 (SP). 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
35
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
16.	 A Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the appeal and thereby 
affirmed the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court on the 
following four grounds: 
(i)	
First, the High Court held that, in the absence of any 
obligation under the ATS for the defendant no. 1 to furnish 
probate certificate before executing the sale deed, time was 
the essence of the contract. Thus, the plaintiff, having failed 
to pay the balance sale consideration within the stipulated 
four-month period, committed breach of the conditions 
specified in the ATS. Further, the Court took note of the fact 
that it was only after a lapse of three months from the expiry 
of the stipulated four-month period that the plaintiff issued 
legal notice dated 18.02.2008 to the defendant no.1 calling 
upon her to execute the ATS. The relevant observations 
read as under:
“14. […] There is no recital in the agreement of sale 
that the defendant No.1 was required to furnish the 
probate certificate from the competent Court before 
executing the sale deed in favour of the plaintiff 
upon receipt of the balance sale consideration. […] 
In the absence of requirement for furnishing probate 
certificate, the contention of the plaintiff that the 
defendant No.1 failed to perform her part of the 
contract is not acceptable having regard to the fact 
that it was well within his knowledge that the defendant 
No.1 acquired the suit property by virtue of the will 
executed in her favour by her mother, and the same 
was acted upon and her name was entered in the 
concerned revenue records. 
15. The sale transaction was required to be completed 
within four months from the date of execution of sale 
agreement. The plaintiff failed to perform his part of 
the contract by coming forward to pay the balance 
sale consideration within four months as specified 
in the sale agreement. It is only after expiry of three 
months from the said date, the plaintiff issued the 
legal notice to the defendant No.1 calling upon her 
to execute the sale agreement.”
36
Supreme Court Reports
(ii)	
Secondly, the High Court observed that the plaintiff, in his cross-
examination, admitted that he did not possess any documents 
to establish his ability to pay the balance sale consideration. 
Further, the application moved by the plaintiff for production 
of additional documents, to show his ‘readiness’, was rejected 
by the Court, on the ground that any prior lacuna could not be 
allowed to be filled up at the appellate stage. Pursuant to the 
aforesaid, the High Court held that the plaintiff, having failed to 
prove his readiness and willingness to perform his part of the 
contract under Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (for 
short, “the 1963 Act”), was not entitled to the relief of specific 
performance. The relevant observations read as under: 
“17. PW1 in his cross-examination has clearly 
admitted that he has no documents to show that 
he possessed the requisite amount to pay the 
balance sale consideration. The documents sought 
to be produced by the plaintiff by way of additional 
evidence also discloses that the plaintiff did not 
possess the requisite amount from the date of 
execution of sale agreement till filing of the suit or 
had the capacity to raise the requisite amount to 
pay the balance sale consideration. Further, the 
said additional documents cannot be permitted 
to be produced to fill up the lacuna before the 
Appellate Court and the same cannot be considered 
and accordingly, the application for production of 
additional documents is rejected.
18. […] In view of the aforesaid proposition of law 
enunciated by the Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
Division Bench of this Court, it is held that plaintiff 
having failed to prove that he had the requisite funds 
to pay the balance consideration is not entitled for 
relief for granting the decree for specific performance 
under Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963.”
(iii)	 Thirdly, the High Court held that the defendant no. 1 failed to 
prove the termination of the ATS in favour of the plaintiff, as 
no documentary evidence to substantiate the same was placed 
on record. However, the defendant nos. 5 and 6 respectively 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
37
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
were deemed bona fide purchasers for value, in view of the 
fact that the sale deed dated 15.02.2008 was executed in their 
favour only after the expiry of the four-month period in the ATS. 
Additionally, it is an admitted position of the plaintiff that he had 
obtained the certified copy of the sale deed executed in favor of 
the defendants nos. 5 and 6 respectively at the time of filing of 
the suit. On account of the plaintiff’s omission to challenge the 
said sale deed, the Court held that the suit was not maintainable 
against the defendant nos. 5 and 6 respectively. The relevant 
observations read as under: 
“19. The defendant No.1 in her reply notice dated 
15.3.2008 -Ex.P.13 has stated that the sale agreement 
was terminated on the ground that the plaintiff has 
failed to perform his part of the contract by paying 
the balance sale consideration within the specified 
time vide letter. However, the defendant No.1 has not 
placed any documentary evidence to substantiate 
the said claim. Hence, it is held that the defendant 
No.1 has failed to prove that the sale agreement 
was terminated.
20. […] The sale deed executed in favour of 
defendants No.5 and 6 after expiry of four months 
specified for completion of sale transaction cannot be 
held to be executed during subsistence of the sale 
agreement. Hence, the defendants No.5 and 6 are 
held to be bonafide purchasers for value.
21. The plaintiff in the cross-examination has admitted 
that he obtained the certified copy of the sale deed 
executed in favour of defendants No.5 and 6 at the 
time of filing of the suit. However, the plaintiff for the 
reasons best known to him has not challenged the 
sale deed. In the absence of challenge to the same, 
the suit filed by the plaintiff against defendants No.5 
and 6 is not maintainable.”
(i)	
Lastly, the High Court recorded that the plaintiff had not 
sought for an alternative prayer for refund of the advance sale 
consideration in the suit as mandated by Section 22 of the 1963 
Act. In view of the requirements under Sub-section 2 of the said 
38
Supreme Court Reports
Section, it was held that, in the absence of a specific claim for 
refund of advance money, the plaintiff was not entitled to such 
refund. The relevant observations read as under: 
“22. The plaintiff has not sought for an alternative 
prayer for refund of the advance sale consideration in 
the suit as required under Section 22 of the Specific 
Relief Act, 1963. In the case of Sukhwinder Singh 
(supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that 
the plaintiff therein is entitled for refund of advance 
sale consideration from the defendant No.2 - the 
purchaser of suit property from the defendant No.1 
who had remained absent since the defendant No.2 
benefited from the property. However, the defendants 
No.5 and 6 cannot be directed to repay the advance 
sale consideration and compensate the plaintiff since 
the plaintiff had not sought for alternative prayer for 
refund of earnest money in the suit as was done in 
the case before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. In the 
absence of alternative prayer for refund of earnest 
money, the prayer for refund of earnest money cannot 
be granted in view of Section 22 of the Specific 
Relief Act. Sub-Section 2 of Section 22 of the said 
Act specifies that no relief under clause (a) or clause 
(b) of sub-section (1) shall be granted by the court 
unless it has been specifically claimed. In the absence 
of such a claim, the plaintiff is held not entitled for 
refund of earnest money.”
C.	
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
17.	 Mr. Anand Sanjay M. Nuli, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for 
the appellant/plaintiff, submitted that the defendant no. 1 failed to 
obtain the promised probate certificate with respect to the suit property 
despite multiple requests from the plaintiff. It was further submitted 
that the defendant no. 4 has specifically admitted that between 
18.02.2008 and 20.02.2008, the plaintiff voluntarily offered to pay 
an additional Rs.10,00,000/- beyond the agreed sale consideration 
of Rs.55,50,000/-. The learned Senior Counsel contended that the 
aforesaid admission proved the readiness and willingness of the 
plaintiff to fulfill his part of the contract. 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
39
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
18.	 Mr. Nuli submitted that the defendant nos. 1-4, exhibiting mala 
fide intent, sold the suit property to the defendant nos. 5 and 6 
respectively for Rs.38,40,000/- within just two months after the expiry 
of the stipulated four-month period. It was argued that the purported 
cancellation of the ATS was allegedly effected via a letter from the 
defendant nos. 1-4, though the said letter was never produced before 
the Trial Court. Further, he asserted that no prior notice had been 
served on the plaintiff before forfeiting the advance sale consideration 
or executing the sale deed in favour of the defendant nos. 5 and 6 
respectively.
19.	 The learned Senior Counsel for the appellant/plaintiff submitted that 
the plaintiff, as an alternative to the relief of specific performance, is 
entitled to a refund of the advance money paid by him. Mr. Nuli relied 
upon the judgments of this Court in Desh Raj v. Rohtash Singh, 
reported in (2023) 3 SCC 714 and Kamal Kumar v. Premlata Joshi, 
reported in (2019) 3 SCC 704, to argue that the relief of refund of 
advance money can be granted under Prayer (C) of the plaint which 
beseeches the Court to pass any order as it deems fit, despite there 
being no specific prayer to that effect. 
D.	
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NOS. 1-4
20.	 Ms. Supreeta Sharanagouda, the learned Counsel for respondent/
defendant Nos. 1-4, submitted that the plaintiff, in his cross-
examination, admitted that he had no documents to show that 
he possessed the requisite amount to pay the balance sale 
consideration. Further, it was argued that the additional documents 
sought to be produced by the plaintiff also disclosed his financial 
incapacity from the date of execution of the ATS until the filing of the 
suit. The learned Counsel, relying upon Pydi Ramana v. Davarasety 
Manmadha Rao, reported in (2024) 7 SCC 515, asserted that the 
plaintiff failed to show his “readiness” and “willingness” to perform 
the contract. 
21.	 Ms. Sharanagouda argued, that having regard to the fact that the 
balance sale consideration of Rs.35,50,000/- was to be paid within 
four months from the date of the execution of the ATS, time was 
evidently the essence of the contract. This was further established 
by the very purpose of the sale, which was the urgent business 
requirement of the defendant nos. 1 and 4, that got frustrated owing 
to the failure of the plaintiff to pay the balance consideration on time.
40
Supreme Court Reports
22.	 The learned Counsel further contended that pursuant to the recitals 
in the ATS, there was consensus between the parties with respect 
to the forfeiture of advance money in the event of the purchaser’s 
default in fulfilling the terms of the agreement. 
E.	
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT NOS. 5-7
23.	 Mr. Dhawesh Pahuja, the learned Counsel appearing for the 
respondent nos. 5-7 herein, submitted that the original defendant 
nos. 5 and 6 fall under the exception carved out by Section 19(b) 
of the1963 Act, having purchased the suit property in good faith 
and without notice of the prior ATS in favour of the plaintiff. It was 
argued that the factum of the prior ATS was suppressed and could 
not be discovered even on thorough due diligence, considering that 
the ATS was unregistered. An encumbrance certificate was placed 
on record to substantiate the same, which did not reveal any prior 
agreement in relation to the Suit Property. 
24.	 The learned Counsel argued that the defendant nos. 5 and 6 
respectively issued a legal notice dated 05.05.2008 against defendant 
nos. 1-4 soon after receiving objections regarding transfer of Khata 
from Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (for short, “BBMP”). It 
was asserted that only in the reply dated 23.05.2008 to the said legal 
notice that the defendant nos. 5 and 6 respectively were informed 
about the prior ATS dated 25.07.2007 and the eventual lapse of the 
said ATS on 25.11.2007 due to the default on part of the plaintiff.
25.	 In the last, it was argued that it would be too much to ask the bona 
fide purchasers to refund Rs.20,00,000/- to the appellant/plaintiff. Such 
a liability ought to be fastened upon the party guilty of suppression, 
i.e. the respondent/defendant nos. 1-4. 
F.	
ANALYSIS
26.	 In view of the order dated 20.03.2023 passed by this Court, we are 
limiting our consideration in this matter solely to the issue of refund 
of earnest money.
27.	 Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and 
having gone through the materials on record, the only question that 
falls for our consideration is whether the appellant (original plaintiff) 
is entitled to the refund of the amount of Rs.20,00,000/- purportedly 
paid as “advance money”? 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
41
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
28.	 We intend to answer the aforesaid question in two parts, carefully 
delineating the following:
i.	
Validity of the Forfeiture of Advance Money; and
ii.	
Law on the Alternative Relief of Refund of Earnest Money under 
Section 22 of the 1963 Act.
29.	 At the cost of repetition, we deem it necessary to state that there 
existed an explicit forfeiture clause in the ATS, which stipulated that 
the advance money paid would stand forfeited in the event of default 
by the buyer in fulfilling the terms of the contract. Similarly, in case of 
default on part of the seller, the advance money was to be doubled 
and paid back to the buyer. Pursuant to the aforesaid forfeiture 
clause, the respondent nos. 1-4 herein forfeited the advance money 
on account of the default by the appellant in paying the balance sale 
consideration of Rs.35,50,000/- within the stipulated four-month period.
i.	
Validity of the Forfeiture of Advance Money 
a.	
Difference between Earnest Money and Advance Money 
30.	  At the outset, it is pertinent to distinguish between “advance money” 
and “earnest money”. The said terms are often used interchangeably. 
The distinction becomes all the more essential, given that the ATS 
explicitly refers to the forfeited sum as “advance money”.
31.	 Here, we consider it apposite to refer to the meanings of the said 
terms. The word “advance” means money in whole or in part, 
forming the consideration of an agreement paid before the same is 
completely payable. On the other hand, the word “earnest” stands for 
a sum of money given for the purpose of binding a contract, which 
is forfeited if the contract does not go off and adjusted in price if 
the contract goes through. [See: P Ramanatha Aiyar in “Advanced 
Law Lexicon”, 7th Edn.]
32.	 The principles governing the scope of “earnest money” were succinctly 
explained in the case of Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills v. Tata Air 
Craft Ltd., reported in (1969) 3 SCC 522, reproduced as under:
“21. From a review of the decisions cited above, the 
following principles emerge regarding ‘earnest’:
‘(1) It must be given at the moment at which the 
contract is concluded.
42
Supreme Court Reports
(2) It represents a guarantee that the contract will 
be fulfilled or, in other words, “earnest” is given to 
bind the contract.
(3) It is part of the purchase price when that 
transaction is carried out.
(4) It is forfeited when the transaction falls through 
by reason of the default or failure of the purchaser.
(5) Unless there is anything to the contrary in the 
terms of the contract, on default committed by the 
buyer, the seller is entitled to forfeit the earnest.’”
(Emphasis supplied)
33.	 In the case of Videocon Properties Ltd. v. Bhalchandra 
Laboratories reported in (2004) 3 SCC 711, while assessing 
the difference between “advance” and “earnest”, this Court took 
the view that the words used in the agreement alone cannot be 
determinative of the true nature of the amount advanced. Instead, 
the intention of the parties and the surrounding circumstances serve 
as more apt indicators. Further, the Court observed that earnest 
money fulfils a dual purpose: first, it operates as part-payment of 
the purchase price and; secondly, as security for the performance 
of the contractual obligations. Thus, its true character and purpose 
can only be canvassed on a close reading of the agreement, and the 
relevant contextual factors. The relevant observations are reproduced 
hereinbelow: 
“14. […] Further, it is not the description by words used 
in the agreement only that would be determinative of the 
character of the sum but really the intention of parties 
and surrounding circumstances as well, that have to be 
looked into and what may be called an advance may 
really be a deposit or earnest money and what is termed 
as ‘a deposit or earnest money’ may ultimately turn out to 
be really an advance or part of purchase price. Earnest 
money or deposit also, thus, serves two purposes of being 
part-payment of the purchase money and security for the 
performances of the contract by the party concerned, 
who paid it.”
(Emphasis supplied)
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
43
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
34.	 In Satish Batra v. Sudhir Rawal, reported in (2013) 1 SCC 345, 
this Court emphatically held that it is only the “earnest money”, paid 
as a pledge for the due performance of the contract, that can be 
forfeited by the seller on account of the buyer’s default. In the same 
vein, earnest money can also be doubled and paid back to the buyer 
if the contract falls through due to the seller’s default. An amount 
which is in nature of an “advance” or serves as part-payment of the 
purchase price cannot be forfeited unless it is a guarantee for the 
due performance of the contract. The Court further held that despite 
the existence of an outright forfeiture clause, it shall not apply if the 
amount stipulated in the contract is found to be only in the nature 
of part-payment of the purchase price. Consequently, the forfeiture 
of “advance money” as part of earnest money can only be justified 
if the terms of the contract are clear and explicit to that effect. The 
relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“6. […] In Chiranjit Singh v. Har Swarup [(1926) 23 LW 
172 : AIR 1926 PC 1] it has been held that (LW p. 174) 
the earnest money is part of the purchase price when 
the transaction goes forward and it is forfeited when the 
transaction falls through, by reason of the fault or failure 
of the purchaser. […]
xx xx xx
10. In DDA v. Grihsthapana Coop. Group Housing Society 
Ltd. [1995 Supp (1) SCC 751], this Court following the 
judgment of the Privy Council in Har Swarup [(1926) 23 
LW 172 : AIR 1926 PC 1] and Shree Hanuman Cotton Mills 
[(1969) 3 SCC 522] , held that the forfeiture of the earnest 
money was legal. In V. Lakshmanan v. B.R. Mangalagiri 
[1995 Supp (2) SCC 33] this Court held as follows : (SCC 
p. 36, para 5)
“5. The question then is whether the respondents 
are entitled to forfeit the entire amount. It is seen 
that a specific covenant under the contract was that 
the respondents are entitled to forfeit the money 
paid under the contract. So when the contract fell 
through by the default committed by the appellant, 
as part of the contract, they are entitled to forfeit the 
entire amount.”
xx xx xx
44
Supreme Court Reports
15. The law is, therefore, clear that to justify the forfeiture 
of advance money being part of “earnest money” the 
terms of the contract should be clear and explicit. Earnest 
money is paid or given at the time when the contract is 
entered into and, as a pledge for its due performance by 
the depositor to be forfeited in case of non-performance 
by the depositor. There can be converse situation also 
that if the seller fails to perform the contract the purchaser 
can also get double the amount, if it is so stipulated. 
It is also the law that part-payment of purchase price 
cannot be forfeited unless it is a guarantee for the due 
performance of the contract. In other words, if the payment 
is made only towards part-payment of consideration and 
not intended as earnest money then the forfeiture clause 
will not apply.”
(Emphasis supplied)
35.	 A forfeiture clause identical to the one in the present ATS was found 
in the case of Satish Batra (supra). It provided for the forfeiture of 
earnest money in case of the purchaser’s default, as well as the 
payment of double the amount of earnest money in case of the 
vendor’s default. This Court allowed the forfeiture of the earnest 
money, which was held to be security for the due performance 
of the contract, by the seller when the transaction fell through on 
account of the purchaser’s fault. The relevant forfeiture clause and 
observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“5. […] The question whether the seller can retain the 
entire amount of earnest money depends upon the terms 
of the agreement. The relevant clause of the agreement 
for sale dated 29-11-2005 is extracted hereunder for easy 
reference:
“(e) If the prospective purchaser fails to fulfil the 
above condition, the transaction shall stand cancelled 
and earnest money will be forfeited. In case I fail to 
complete the transaction as stipulated above, the 
purchaser will get double the amount of the earnest 
money. In both conditions, the dealer will get 4% 
commission from the faulting party.”
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
45
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
The clause, therefore, stipulates that if the purchaser 
fails to fulfil the conditions mentioned in the agreement, 
the transaction shall stand cancelled and earnest money 
will be forfeited. On the other hand, if the seller fails to 
complete the transaction, the purchaser would get double 
the amount of earnest money. Undisputedly, the purchaser 
failed to perform his part of the contract, then the question 
is whether the seller can forfeit the entire earnest money.
xx xx xx
17. We are, therefore, of the view that the seller was justified 
in forfeiting the amount of Rs.7,00,000 as per the relevant 
clause, since the earnest money was primarily a security for 
the due performance of the agreement and, consequently, 
the seller is entitled to forfeit the entire deposit. […]”
(Emphasis supplied) 
36.	 A three-Judge Bench of this Court, of which one of us  (J.B. Pardiwala, J.) 
was a part, reiterated the distinction between “earnest” and “advance” 
in Central Bank of India v. Shanmugavelu, reported in (2024) 6 SCC 
641, thus stating that “earnest” differs from “advance money”, though 
the former can be treated as part-payment of the sale consideration 
if the contractual terms are duly honoured. In other words, earnest 
money is adjusted against the total sale consideration if the contract 
goes through. The relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“84. The difference between an earnest or deposit and an 
advance part-payment of price is now well established in 
law. Earnest is something given by the promisee to the 
promisor to mark the conclusiveness of the contract. This 
is quite apart from the price. It may also avail as a part-
payment if the contract goes through. But even so it would 
not lose its character as earnest, if in fact and in truth it 
was intended as mere evidence of the bargain. An advance 
is a part to be adjusted at the time of the final payment. If 
the promisee defaults to carry out the contract, he loses 
the earnest but may recover the part-payment leaving 
untouched the promisor’s right to recover damages. […]”
(Emphasis supplied)
46
Supreme Court Reports
37.	 From the above exposition of law, it becomes amply clear that 
the amount of Rs.20,00,000/- termed as “advance money” in the 
ATS, was essentially “earnest money”. In other words, it was in the 
nature of a guarantee for the due performance of the contract. In a 
fashion akin to earnest money, the said amount was paid at the very 
execution of the ATS. It was meant to be adjusted against the total 
sale consideration of Rs.55,50,000/- if the transaction was carried 
out, which is evident from the ATS clause that states the balance 
sale consideration to be as Rs.35,50,000/-. Further, it was liable to 
be forfeited in the event that the transaction fell through by reason 
of the default on part of the purchaser. Consequently, when the 
appellant-purchaser failed to comply with the contractual stipulation of 
paying the balance sale consideration within a period of four months 
from the date of the agreement, the respondent nos. 1-4 (vendors) 
were justified in forfeiting the advance money. 
38.	 We consider it apposite at this juncture to take note of the conditions 
that make time the essence of a contract. Such conditions were 
precisely outlined by this Court in Chand Rani v. Kamal Rani, 
reported in (1993) 1 SCC 519, which are reproduced hereunder:
“25. From an analysis of the above case-law it is clear 
that in the case of sale of immovable property there is no 
presumption as to time being the essence of the contract. 
Even if it is not of the essence of the contract the Court 
may infer that it is to be performed in a reasonable time 
if the conditions are:
1. From the express terms of the contract;
2. from the nature of the property; and
3. from the surrounding circumstances, for example: 
the object of making the contract.”
(Emphasis supplied)
39.	 This Court recently reaffirmed the principles for deeming whether time 
is of the essence in a contract in Welspun Specialty Solutions Ltd. 
v. ONGC, reported in (2022) 2 SCC 382. It held that the determination 
must be made by reading and analysing the contract in its entirety, 
taking into account the surrounding circumstances. An explicit clause 
stating that time is of the essence is not, by itself, sufficient. The 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
47
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
Court further observed that any provision allowing extensions under 
a contract effectively negates such a clause, thereby indicating that 
time is not of the essence. The relevant observations are reproduced 
hereinbelow:
“34. In order to consider the relevancy of time conditioned 
obligations, we may observe some basic principles:
(a) Subject to the nature of contract, general rule is 
that promisor is bound to complete the obligation by 
the date for completion stated in the contract. [Refer 
to Percy Bilton Ltd. v. Greater London Council [Percy 
Bilton Ltd. v. Greater London Council, (1982) 1 WLR 
794 (HL)] ]
(b) That is subject to the exception that the promisee 
is not entitled to liquidated damages, if by his act 
or omissions he has prevented the promisor from 
completing the work by the completion date. [Refer 
Holme v. Guppy [Holme v. Guppy, (1838) 3 M & W 
387 : 150 ER 1195] ]
(c) These general principles may be amended by 
the express terms of the contract as stipulated in 
this case.
35. It is now settled that “whether time is of the essence 
in a contract”, has to be culled out from the reading of the 
entire contract as well as the surrounding circumstances. 
Merely having an explicit clause may not be sufficient to 
make time the essence of the contract. As the contract was 
spread over a long tenure, the intention of the parties to 
provide for extensions surely reinforces the fact that timely 
performance was necessary. The fact that such extensions 
were granted indicates ONGC’s effort to uphold the integrity 
of the contract instead of repudiating the same.”
(Emphasis supplied)
40.	 Having regard to the aforesaid authorities, the intention of the parties 
and the surrounding circumstances in the present case, it can be 
sufficiently inferred that the inclusion of the forfeiture clause in the 
ATS was intended to bind the contracting parties and ensure the due 
48
Supreme Court Reports
performance of the contract. This is particularly significant given the 
stipulated four-month period for completing the sale transaction and 
the primary object of executing the ATS, being the urgency of the 
respondent nos. 1–4 regarding the OTS, which was known to the 
appellant, as recorded by the Trial Court. The findings of the Trial 
Court, along with the impugned judgment affirming that time was of 
the essence, further substantiate the said intent.
41.	 Furthermore, the appellant neither sought any extension for 
performing his part of the contract nor was any extension of time 
granted by the respondent nos. 1-4. On the contrary, within two 
months of the stipulated period’s expiry, the respondent nos. 1–4 
proceeded with a distress sale of the suit property to the respondent 
nos. 5–7 (subsequent purchasers), further underscoring the urgency 
underlying the contract.
b.	
Permissible Extent of Forfeiture 
42.	 The issue at hand may be looked at from another angle. Having 
reached the aforesaid conclusion that the forfeiture of advance 
money by the respondent nos. 1-4 herein was lawful, it appears 
fitting to determine whether they were entitled to the entire amount 
of Rs.20,00,000/-. 
43.	 At this juncture, we deem it appropriate to take note of Section 
74 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (for short, “the 1872 Act”). 
Section 74 of the 1872 Act deals with the compensation for loss or 
damage caused by a breach of the contract when a particular sum 
of liquidated damages or penalty is already set forth under the terms 
of the contract. It further provides that such compensation must be 
reasonable and it cannot, in any circumstance, exceed the amount 
stipulated in the contract. The same is extracted below:
“74. Compensation for breach of contract where penalty 
stipulated for.—When a contract has been broken, if a 
sum is named in the contract as the amount to be paid 
in case of such breach, or if the contract contains any 
other stipulation by way of penalty, the party complaining 
of the breach is entitled, whether or not actual damage 
or loss is proved to have been caused thereby, to receive 
from the party who has broken the contract reasonable 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
49
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
compensation not exceeding the amount so named or, as 
the case may be, the penalty stipulated for.
[…]”
44.	 A conjoint reading of Section 74 of the 1872 Act and the principles 
underlying forfeiture clauses was undertaken in the case of Fateh 
Chand v. Balkishan Dass, reported in 1963 SCC OnLine SC 49. 
This Court held that Section 74 of the 1872 Act will apply to every 
covenant involving a penalty, whether it is for a future payment on 
breach of the contract or the forfeiture of a sum already paid. Ergo, 
a forfeiture clause in a contract would ordinarily fall within the ambit 
of the words “any other stipulation by way of penalty”. Further, it was 
held that supplying evidence of a loss incurred by the vendor on 
account of the breach of contract by the buyer would be mandatory 
to justify forfeiture, and only a reasonable amount, commensurate 
with such loss, can be forfeited. The relevant observations are 
extracted hereinbelow:
“14. […] The words “to be paid” which appear in the first 
condition do not qualify the second condition relating to 
stipulation by way of penalty. The expression “if the contract 
contains any other stipulation by way of penalty” widens 
the operation of the section so as to make it applicable to 
all stipulations by way of penalty, whether the stipulation is 
to pay an amount of money, or is of another character, as, 
for example, providing for forfeiture of money already paid. 
There is nothing in the expression which implies that the 
stipulation must be one for rendering something after the 
contract is broken. There is no ground for holding that the 
expression ‘contract contains any other stipulation by way 
of penalty’ is limited to cases of stipulation in the nature of 
an agreement to pay money or deliver property on breach 
and does not comprehend covenants under which amounts 
paid or property delivered under the contract, which by 
the terms of the contract expressly or by clear implication 
are liable to be forfeited.
xx xx xx
16. There is no evidence that any loss was suffered by the 
plaintiff in consequence of the default by the defendant, 
50
Supreme Court Reports
save as to the loss suffered by him by being kept out of 
possession of the property. There is no evidence that the 
property had depreciated in value since the date of the 
contract provided; nor was there evidence that any other 
special damage had resulted. The contact provided for 
forfeiture of Rs 25,000 consisting of Rs. 1039 paid as 
earnest money and Rs 24,000 paid as part of the purchase 
price. The defendant has conceded that the plaintiff was 
entitled to forfeit the amount of Rs 1000 which was paid 
as earnest money. We cannot however agree with the 
High Court that 13 percent of the price may be regarded 
as reasonable compensation in relation to the value of the 
contract as a whole, as that in our opinion is assessed 
on an arbitrary assumption. The plaintiff failed to prove 
the loss suffered by him in consequence of the breach 
of the contract committed by the defendant and we are 
unable to find any principle on which compensation equal 
to ten percent of the agreed price could be awarded to 
the plaintiff. […]
(Emphasis supplied)
45.	 It is imperative to mention herein that in Fateh Chand (supra), this 
Court, while setting “earnest money” apart from a “penalty”, held 
that insofar as forfeiture of earnest money is concerned, Section 
74 of the 1872 Act will not apply. The relevant observations are 
reproduced hereinbelow:
“7. The Attorney General appearing on behalf of the 
defendant has not challenged the plaintiff’s right to 
forfeit Rs 1000 which were expressly named and paid 
as earnest money. He has, however, contended that the 
covenant which gave to the plaintiff the right to forfeit Rs 
24,000 out of the amount paid by the defendant was a 
stipulation in the nature of penalty, and the plaintiff can 
retain that amount or part thereof only if he establishes 
that in consequence of the breach by the defendant, he 
suffered loss, and in the view of the Court the amount 
or part thereof is reasonable compensation for that loss. 
We agree with the Attorney General that the amount of 
Rs 24,000 was not of the nature of earnest money. The 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
51
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
agreement expressly provided for payment of Rs 1000 as 
earnest money, and that amount was paid by the defendant. 
The amount of Rs 24,000 was to be paid when vacant 
possession of the land and building was delivered, and 
it was expressly referred to as “out of the sale price.” If 
this amount was also to be regarded as earnest money, 
there was no reason why the parties would not have so 
named it in the agreement of sale. […]”
(Emphasis supplied)
46.	 To the same effect is the decision of this Court in Maula Bux v. 
Union of India, reported in (1969) 2 SCC 554, wherein it was held 
that forfeiture of earnest money is not deemed as penal and that 
Section 74 of the 1872 Act will only apply where the forfeiture is 
in the nature of a penalty. The relevant observations are extracted 
hereunder:
“5. Forfeiture of earnest money under a contract for sale 
of property — movable or immovable — If the amount is 
reasonable, it does not fall within Section 74. That has been 
decided in several cases: Chiranjit Singh v. Har Swarup 
[Chiranjit Singh v. Har Swarup, 1925 SCC OnLine PC 63 : 
(1926) 23 LW 172] ; Roshan Lal v. Delhi Cloth & General 
Mills Co. Ltd. [Roshan Lal v. Delhi Cloth & General Mills 
Co. Ltd., 1910 SCC OnLine All 98 : ILR (1911) 33 All 166]; 
Mohd. Habib-Ullah v. Mohd. Shafi [Mohd. Habib-Ullah v. 
Mohd. Shafi, 1919 SCC OnLine All 87: ILR (1919) 41 
All 324] ; Bishan Chand v. Radha Kishan Das [Bishan 
Chand v. Radha Kishan Das, 1897 SCC OnLine All 52 : 
ILR (1897) 19 All 489 : 1897 AWN 123]. These cases are 
easily explained, for forfeiture of reasonable amount paid 
as earnest money does not amount to imposing a penalty. 
But if forfeiture is of the nature of penalty, Section 74 
applies. Where under the terms of the contract the party 
in breach has undertaken to pay a sum of money or to 
forfeit a sum of money which he has already paid to the 
party complaining of a breach of contract, the undertaking 
is of the nature of a penalty.”
(Emphasis supplied)
52
Supreme Court Reports
47.	 In Shanmugavelu (supra), this Court emphasized upon the 
fundamental difference between the forfeiture of “earnest money” 
and forfeiture of “any other amount”, wherein the former constitutes a 
general forfeiture clause, while the latter qualifies as a penal clause. 
A clause for forfeiture of earnest money thus, only intended as a 
deterrent to ensure due performance of the contractual obligations, will 
not be deemed penal in the ordinary sense. The relevant observations 
are reproduced hereunder:
“81. Even otherwise, what is discernible from the 
abovereferred decisions of Fateh Chand [Fateh Chand v. 
Balkishan Dass, 1963 SCC OnLine SC 49 : AIR 1963 SC 
1405] , Maula Bux [Maula Bux v. Union of India, (1969) 2 
SCC 554] and Satish Batra [Satish Batra v. Sudhir Rawal, 
(2013) 1 SCC 345 : (2013) 1 SCC (Civ) 483] is that there lies 
a difference between forfeiture of any amount and forfeiture 
of earnest money with the former being a penal clause and 
the latter a general forfeiture clause. A clause providing for 
forfeiture of an amount could fundamentally be in the nature 
of a penalty clause or a forfeiture clause in the strict sense 
or even both, and the same has to be determined in the 
facts of every case keeping in mind the nature of contract 
and the nature of consequence envisaged by it.
82. Ordinarily, a forfeiture clause in the strict sense will not 
be a penal clause, if its consequence is intended not as a 
sanction for breach of obligation but rather as security for 
performance of the obligation. This is why Fateh Chand 
[Fateh Chand v. Balkishan Dass, 1963 SCC OnLine SC 
49 : AIR 1963 SC 1405] Maula Bux [Maula Bux v. Union 
of India, (1969) 2 SCC 554] and Satish Batra [Satish 
Batra v. Sudhir Rawal, (2013) 1 SCC 345 : (2013) 1 SCC 
(Civ) 483] held that forfeiture of earnest money deposit 
is not a penal clause, as the deposit of earnest money is 
intended to signify assent of the purchaser to the contract, 
and its forfeiture is envisaged as a deterrent to ensure 
performance of the obligation.”
(Emphasis supplied)
48.	 A different view was taken by this Court in Kailash Nath Associates v. 
DDA, reported in (2015) 4 SCC 136, wherein it held that Section 74 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
53
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
of the 1872 Act applies to the forfeiture of earnest money deposit. 
It further held that proof of actual damage or loss is a sine qua non 
for invoking the said section and thereby, only a reasonable amount 
will be permissible for forfeiture upon the breach of contract. The 
relevant observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“43. […]
xx xx xx
43.2. Reasonable compensation will be fixed on well-known 
principles that are applicable to the law of contract, which 
are to be found inter alia in Section 73 of the Contract Act.
43.3. Since Section 74 awards reasonable compensation 
for damage or loss caused by a breach of contract, damage 
or loss caused is a sine qua non for the applicability of 
the section.
43.5. The sum spoken of may already be paid or be 
payable in future.
43.6. The expression “whether or not actual damage or loss 
is proved to have been caused thereby” means that where 
it is possible to prove actual damage or loss, such proof 
is not dispensed with. It is only in cases where damage 
or loss is difficult or impossible to prove that the liquidated 
amount named in the contract, if a genuine pre-estimate 
of damage or loss, can be awarded.
43.7. Section 74 will apply to cases of forfeiture of earnest 
money under a contract. […]”
(Emphasis supplied)
49.	 This Court expounded on the question of loss in Lakshmanan v. B.R. 
Mangalagiri, reported in 1995 Supp (2) SCC 33, holding that when 
the contract falls through due to the default on part of the appellant-
purchaser, and the resulting loss suffered by the respondent-vendors 
exceeds the amount forfeited under the contract, the forfeiture cannot, 
by any measure, be seen as unjustified. The relevant observations 
are extracted below:
“5. The question then is whether the respondents are 
entitled to forfeit the entire amount. It is seen that a specific 
54
Supreme Court Reports
covenant under the contract was that the respondents are 
entitled to forfeit the money paid under the contract. So 
when the contract fell through by the default committed by 
the appellant, as part of the contract, they are entitled to 
forfeit the entire amount. In this case even otherwise, we 
find that the respondents had suffered damages, firstly for 
one year they were prevented from enjoying the property 
and the appellant had cut off 150 fruit-bearing coconut 
trees and sugarcane crop was destroyed for levelling the 
land apart from cutting down other trees. Pending the 
appeal, the respondents sought for and were granted 
permission by the court for sale of the property. Pursuant 
thereto, they sold the land for which they could not secure 
even the amount under contract and the loss they suffered 
would be around Rs 70,000. Under those circumstances, 
their forfeiting the sum of Rs 50,000 cannot be said to be 
unjustified. The appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.”
(Emphasis supplied)
50.	 We may as well refer to a recent judgment of this Court in Godrej 
Projects Development Ltd. v. Anil Karlekar, reported in 2025 
SCC OnLine SC 222, wherein this Court examined one-sided and 
unconscionable forfeiture clauses. It was held that a forfeiture clause, 
if found to be unfair and unreasonable, cannot be enforced by this 
Court. Further, while citing the clause providing for “forfeiture of 
earnest money deposit” in Satish Batra (supra), it held that the said 
clause could not be said to be one-sided and accordingly, upheld the 
same. The relevant observations are extracted as under:
“26. In the case of Central Inland Water Transport 
Corporation Limited v. Brojo Nath Ganguly8, this Court, 
by taking recourse to Article 14 of the Constitution of 
India, has held that the courts will not enforce an unfair 
and unreasonable contract or an unfair and unreasonable 
clause in a contract, entered into between Parties who are 
not equal in bargaining power. It will be relevant to refer to 
the following observations of this Court in the said case:
“89. […] It will also apply where a man has no choice, 
or rather no meaningful choice, but to give his assent to 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
55
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
a contract or to sign on the dotted line in a prescribed 
or standard form or to accept a set of rules as part 
of the contract, however unfair, unreasonable and 
unconscionable a clause in that contract or form or rules 
may be. This principle, however, will not apply where the 
bargaining power of the contracting parties is equal or 
almost equal. This principle may not apply where both 
parties are businessmen and the contract is a commercial 
transaction.”
xx xx xx
33. Insofar as the judgment in the case of Satish Batra 
(supra) is concerned, the clause providing for “forfeiture of 
earnest money deposit” cannot be said to be one-sided. […]
34. It can thus be seen that in the aforesaid case though 
the term in the Agreement provided for forfeiture of the 
earnest money in the event the prospective purchaser 
fails to fulfill the conditions, it also provided for payment 
of double the amount of earnest money by the vendor to 
the purchaser in case the vendor fails to complete the 
transaction. As such, the said term cannot be said to be 
one-sided.”
(Emphasis supplied)
51.	 On a conspectus of the aforementioned authorities, it is evident 
that a clause for the forfeiture of earnest money is not penal in the 
ordinary sense, rendering Section 74 of the 1872 Act, inapplicable. 
In the present case, the stipulated amount under the ATS was in 
the nature of an earnest money deposit and thus, Section 74 of the 
1872 Act cannot apply to the same. Further, the forfeiture clause was 
fair and equitable rather than one-sided and unconscionable, as it 
imposed liabilities on both the appellant-purchaser and respondent-
sellers, wherein the seller was obligated to pay twice the advance 
amount paid by the buyer in case of his default. 
52.	 Even, for argument’s sake, if we have to apply the principle under 
Section 74 of the 1872 Act to the present case in line with Kailash 
Nath (supra), the forfeiture of the entire amount of advance money 
by the respondent nos. 1-4 would still be justified on the ground that 
56
Supreme Court Reports
there was breach of contract by the appellant, which led to financial 
losses for the respondent nos. 1-4. Such losses, as specifically 
pleaded and proved by the evidence led before the Trial Court, far 
exceeded the amount forfeited under the ATS, a position that was 
duly noted and accepted by the Trial Court. 
ii.	
Law on the Alternative Relief of Refund of Earnest Money 
under Section 22 of the 1963 Act
53.	 The High Court denied the relief of refund of advance money to the 
appellant herein, having regard of the fact that the appellant had 
not sought for an alternative prayer for refund of the advance sale 
consideration in the suit as mandated by Section 22(2) of the 1963 Act. 
54.	 Before we proceed to answer the question formulated by us in para 
27, we deem it necessary to examine Section 22 of the 1963 Act. 
It reads thus:
“22. Power to grant relief for possession, partition, 
refund of earnest money, etc.— (1) Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), any person suing for the 
specific performance of a contract for the transfer of 
immovable property may, in an appropriate case, ask for—
(a) possession, or partition and separate possession, 
of the property, in addition to such performance; or
(b) any other relief to which he may be entitled, 
including the refund of any earnest money or deposit 
paid or [made by] him, in case his claim for specific 
performance is refused. 
(2) No relief under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) shall be granted by the court unless it has been 
specifically claimed: 
Provident that where the plaintiff has not claimed any 
such relief in the plaint, the court shall, at any stage of 
the proceeding, allow him to amend the plaint on such 
terms as may be just for including a claim for such relief. 
(3) The power of the court to grant relief under clause (b) 
of sub-section (1) shall be without prejudice to its powers 
to award compensation under section 21.”
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
57
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
55.	 Sir Frederick Pollock, 3rd Baronet, in Pollock & Mulla: The Indian 
Contract and Specific Relief Acts, 16th Edn., has discussed the 
object and scope of Section 22 of the 1963 Act and the alternative 
relief of refund of earnest money deposit, as follows:
“[s 22.6.2] Refund of Earnest Money or Deposit
[…] The relief of refunding of earnest money or deposit 
cannot be granted unless specifically claimed. Further 
such a plea cannot be considered in a second appeal, 
particularly when the issue of execution of the agreement 
has been held as not having been proved.
Refund of amounts paid may also be ordered when 
specific performance has been refused on the ground 
of unexplained delay by the plaintiff in approaching the 
Court. It is also open to a plaintiff to give up his prayer for 
specific performance at the hearing, or before the hearing, 
and ask for return of the earnest money or deposit.
Where a clause entitling forfeiture of earnest money is 
contained in the agreement, it would not be refundable to 
the plaintiff who has failed to perform his part of the contract. 
Forfeiture of earnest money should not be allowed where 
the vendor has not suffered any loss, but has actually 
gained, viz., on account of frustration of contract. Where 
the value of land had considerably increased after the sale 
agreement, the Court, while refusing a decree for specific 
performance, ordered a refund of the earnest amount on 
the ground that the plaintiff did not suffer any loss, but 
had gained due to the default of the plaintiff.
xx
xx
xx
[s 22.7] Pleadings and Amendment to Pleadings
Section 22 enacts a rule of pleading. It enables the plaintiff 
to ask for possession in the suit for specific performance 
and empowers the Court to provide, in the decree itself, 
that upon payment by the plaintiff of the consideration 
money within the given time, the defendant should execute 
the deed and put the plaintiff in possession. If the said 
relief is not claimed in the plaint, the Court shall permit 
the plaintiff at any stage of the proceedings, including 
58
Supreme Court Reports
execution proceedings, to amend the plaint on such terms 
as it deems proper. The purpose is to avoid multiplicity of 
suits. This provision overrides the provisions of Order VI, 
rule 17 of CPC, 1908. Omission to seek alternative relief 
is not a ground to reject the plaint.
A plaintiff may amend the plaint to include a claim for refund 
to advance money paid to the defendant. The amendment 
may be made at any stage of the proceeding, including 
the appellate stage. The option vests with the plaintiff to 
claim alternative relief, and unless he claims such a relief, 
the Court is not empowered to grant it.”
(Emphasis supplied)
56.	 The expression “at any stage of the proceeding” has been judicially 
interpreted to include the appellate stage as well, as affirmed by a 
catena of High Court decisions. This interpretation entails that that an 
amendment of the plaint to incorporate a prayer for the alternative relief 
of refund of earnest money may be sought even during the first appeal 
from the original decree passed in a suit for specific performance. 
The non-obstante clause attached to Section 22(1) of the 1963 Act 
grants it an overriding effect, thereby excluding the operation of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Further, the use of the word “shall” 
in the proviso to Section 22(2) imposes a mandate upon the court to 
allow the amendment of plaint, as sought by the party, at any stage. 
[See: Sahida Bibi v. Sk. Golam Muhammad, 1982 SCC OnLine 
Cal 59; Tarit Bhowmik v Mukul Day, 2014 SCC Cal 5361]
57.	 In Manickam v. Vasantha, reported in 2022 SCC OnLine SC 2096, 
this Court was dealing with the question of whether the executing 
court could deliver possession in execution of a decree where no 
specific prayer for possession had been made in a suit for specific 
performance. It held that the proviso appended to Sub-section (2) 
of Section 22 of the 1963, which mandates the Court to allow an 
amendment of the plaint at any stage of the proceeding to include a 
claim for such relief under Clause (a) or (b) of Section 22(1), renders 
the provision directory in nature. The Court opined that Section 
22(2) is qualified by the phrase “in an appropriate case”, referring 
to situations where such relief does not necessarily flow from a 
decree for specific performance of a sale agreement. Accordingly, 
if such relief under Clause (a) or (b) of Section 22(1) appears as 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
59
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
a necessary implication of the decree for specific performance, a 
specific prayer for claiming such relief would not be required. In light 
of these principles, this Court held that the relief of possession was 
inherently included in a decree for specific performance and need not 
be specifically pleaded. Furthermore, it reiterated that the words “at 
any stage of the proceeding” have a wide amplitude, encompassing 
both the appellate stage and execution proceedings. The relevant 
observations are reproduced hereinbelow:
“22. The Bombay High Court in a judgment reported as 
Lotu Bandu Sonavane v. Pundalik Nimba Koli held that relief 
of possession is to be claimed “in an appropriate case”. It 
means a case in which the relief does not necessarily flow 
from the decree for specific performance of the agreement 
of sale. If such a relief is ancillary to and necessarily 
flows from a decree for specific performance, then it is 
not necessary to specifically seek such a relief and the 
bar of S. 22(2) would not be attracted. If the defendant is 
in possession of the property agreed to be sold and the 
decree directs a specific performance of the agreement 
of sale, the defendant is bound to execute the sale deed 
as per the decree and to put the plaintiff in possession of 
the property as contemplated by S. 55(1)(f) of the Transfer 
of Property Act. In such a case it is not necessary to 
specifically claim the relief of possession in the suit.
xx
xx
xx
9. The term “proceeding” is a very wide and 
comprehensive term and it includes execution 
proceeding also. The expression “at any stage of 
the proceeding” gives widest permission to the Court 
to allow amendment at any stage of the proceeding 
including execution of the decree. The amendment 
can be allowed even in an appeal arising out of the 
order passed by the executing Court rejecting the 
prayer for permission. The proviso recognises the 
well settled position that the Court passing a decree 
for specific performance retains control over the 
subject matter as long as anything remains to be 
done in the case.”
xx
xx
xx
60
Supreme Court Reports
26. The matter can be examined from another angle 
as well. Section 22(2) of the Act, though is worded in 
negative language, “no relief under clause (a) or clause 
(b) of sub-section (1) shall be granted by the court unless 
it has been specifically claimed”, but the proviso takes 
out the mandatory nature from the substantive provision 
of sub-section (2) when the plaintiff is allowed to amend 
the plaint on such terms as may be just for including the 
plaint for such relief “at any stage of the proceeding”. “At 
any stage of the proceeding” would include the proceeding 
in suit or in appeal and also in execution. The proviso to 
sub-section (2) of Section 22 of the Act contemplates that 
the Court shall, at any stage of the proceedings, allow 
the plaintiff to amend the plaint on such terms as may be 
just for including a claim for such relief. The said proviso 
makes the provision directory as no penal consequences 
follow under sub-section (2) of Section 22. […]
xx
xx
xx
29. To examine whether a provision is directory or 
mandatory, one of the tests is that the court is required to 
ascertain the real intention of the legislature by carefully 
attending to the whole scheme of the statute. Keeping in 
view the scheme of the statute, we find that Section 22(2) 
of the Act is only directory and thus, the decree-holder 
cannot be non-suited for the reason that such relief was 
not granted in the decree for specific relief.
30. The defendant in terms of the agreement is bound to 
handover possession of the land agreed to be sold. The 
expression “at any stage of proceeding” is wide enough 
to allow the plaintiffs to seek relief of possession even at 
the appellate stage or in execution even if such prayer 
was required to be claimed. This Court in Babu Lal has 
explained the circumstances where relief of possession 
may be necessary such as in a suit for partition or in a 
case of separate possession where the property conveyed 
is a joint property. In the suit for specific performance, 
the possession is inherent in such suit, therefore, we find 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
61
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
that the decree-holders are in fact entitled to possession 
in pursuance of the sale deed executed in their favor.”
(Emphasis supplied)
58.	 It is thus a settled position of law that the plaint may be amended 
at any stage of the proceedings to enable the plaintiff to seek an 
alternative relief, including that of refund of earnest money, and the 
courts have been vested with wide judicial discretion to permit such 
amendments. However, under Section 22 of the 1963 Act, the courts 
cannot grant such relief suo moto, since the inclusion of the prayer 
clause remains a sine qua non for the grant of such a relief. In other 
words, when an “appropriate case” exists for seeking the said relief 
under this provision, it must be specifically sought either in the original 
plaint or by way of an amendment. This has been emphatically held 
by this Court in Desh Raj v. Rohtash Singh, reported in (2023) 3 
SCC 714. The relevant observations are reproduced hereunder:
“35. On a plain reading of the above-reproduced provision, 
we have no reason to doubt that the plaintiff in his suit for 
specific performance of a contact is not only entitled to 
seek specific performance of the contract for the transfer 
of immovable property but he can also seek alternative 
relief(s) including the refund of any earnest money, provided 
that such a relief has been specifically incorporated in the 
plaint. The court, however, has been vested with wide 
judicial discretion to permit the plaintiff to amend the 
plaint even at a later stage of the proceedings and seek 
the alternative relief of refund of the earnest money. The 
litmus test appears to be that unless a plaintiff specifically 
seeks the refund of the earnest money at the time of filing 
of the suit or by way of amendment, no such relief can be 
granted to him. The prayer clause is a sine qua non for 
grant of decree of refund of earnest money.
36. Applying these principles to the facts of the case in 
hand, we find that the respondent has neither prayed for 
the relief of refund of earnest money in the original plaint 
nor he sought any amendment at a subsequent stage. In 
the absence of such a prayer, it is difficult to accept that 
the courts would suo motu grant the refund of earnest 
62
Supreme Court Reports
money irrespective of the fact as to whether Section 22(2) 
of the SRA Act is to be construed directory or mandatory 
in nature.”
(Emphasis supplied)
59.	 The judgment in Desh Raj (supra) has been relied upon by the 
learned counsel appearing for the appellant herein. However, it is 
difficult to understand how this judgment furthers their case. On the 
contrary, this judgment clearly contradicts their position, stating in 
unequivocal terms that, in the absence of a prayer for the relief of 
refund of earnest money, such relief cannot be granted by this Court. 
60.	  Another judgment which has been relied upon by the learned counsel 
for the appellant in reference to the issue of refund of earnest money, 
is the case of Kamal Kumar v. Premlata Joshi, reported in (2019) 
3 SCC 704. Notably, the ruling in this case also stands contrary to 
the arguments advanced by the appellant on account of the fact 
that the relief of refund of earnest money was denied therein. The 
relevant observations are extracted hereunder:
“9. In the case at hand, we find that the two courts below 
have gone into these questions in the light of pleadings 
and evidence and recorded a categorical finding against 
the plaintiff holding that the plaintiff was neither ready nor 
willing to perform his part of the contract and, therefore, he 
was not entitled to claim the relief of specific performance 
of the contract against the defendants in relation to the 
suit land. It was also held that the plaintiff was not entitled 
to claim any relief of refund of earnest money because it 
was liable to be adjusted as agreed between them.”
(Emphasis supplied) 
61.	 Applying these principles to the facts of the case at hand, we find 
ourselves unable to accept the submissions of the appellant that, in 
the absence of a specific prayer for the refund of advance money 
paid by them, Prayer (c) of the plaint which specifies the grant of 
“such other relief(s) as the Hon’ble Court deems fit in the facts and 
circumstances of the case in the interest of justice”, can be construed 
to include a prayer for such an alternative relief. 
[2025] 6 S.C.R. 
63
K.R. Suresh v. R. Poornima & Ors.
62.	 The reasoning set forth in the case of Manickam (supra) as regards 
the relief of possession under Section 22(1)(a) of the 1963 Act, can 
be appropriately imported in the present case to say that the relief 
of refund of earnest money under Section 2 2(1)(b) is not a relief 
that automatically flows from a decree for specific performance of a 
sale agreement and must, therefore, be explicitly sought. 
63.	 In our considered opinion, the law contained under Section 22(2) of 
the 1963 Act is adequately broad and flexible to allow the appellant 
to seek an amendment of the plaint for the said relief, even at the 
appellate stage. However, no such application for an amendment 
of the plaint was moved either before the trial court or during the 
course of the first appeal before the High Court. That is to say, the 
appellant never prayed for the refund of the advance money. Here, it 
would be redundant to state that the law aids the vigilant, not those 
who sleep over their rights.
E.	
CONCLUSION
64.	 For all the foregoing reasons, we have reached the conclusion that 
the forfeiture of advance money by the respondent nos. 1-4 was 
justified. In such circumstances, we are not inclined to grant the 
relief of refund of advance money to the appellant.
65.	 We are unable to find any kind of perversity or illegality in the impugned 
judgment passed by the High Court. As a result, the present appeal 
stands dismissed.
66.	 Parties shall bear their own costs. Pending application(s), if any, 
stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain